


  	dhresourcesforprojectbuilding



      
    log inhelp




  
  
      
      
        Get a free wiki
         | 
        Try our free business product
      
    

  



    
          	Wiki
	Pages & Files


    
    
      
    

  


	
        
    
      
        
          View

                      Edit

          					

        

      

            
        

        
        		
		
              
                              
                                  To edit this page,

                  request access to the workspace.                

                Already have an account? Log in!

                                            

            


      

      
      	 	
                          
  
      Guides and Introductions
      (redirected from Guides)
  

    
      
      Page history
    
        last edited
    by Alan Liu 1 week, 5 days ago
    

  

  
  
    


    

    
    
	[image: Digital Humanities projects collage]	
 

 

DH  
Toychest  

	 
 

 

Digital Humanities Resources for Project Building  — Guides to DH



	 	 	

(curated by Alan Liu)



(DH Toychest started 2013; last update 2017)





 Guides to Digital Humanities | Tutorials | Tools | Examples | Data Collections & Datasets

 
Guides and Introductions to DH



Guides and Introductions to DH

Contents: General Guides & Resources | Orientation on the Field | Getting Started | Creating and Maintaining an Online Scholarly Presence (Academic Blogging | Academic Twitter) | DH Project-Making | Digitization | Citing Digital Resources | Teaching Guides | The Job Market for DH Graduate Students | Evaluating DH Scholarship for Academic Promotion and Tenure

 

	General Guides & Resources


	CUNY Digital Humanities Resource Guide
	Digital Humanities Keywords (in-progress online collection of essays on key concepts and words in DH) 
	Morgan Paige, What Digital Humanists Do ("basic introduction to some of the major DH activities";   organized by project type) (2013)
	Miriam Posner

	 "How Did They Make That?" (2013)
	"Tutorials and Introductions" to Digital Humanities (2014) 

	Andrew Robichaud and Cameron Blevins, "Humanities 3.0: Tooling Up for Digital Humanities" (2011)
	Simpson Center for the Humanities (U. Washington), Resources for Digital Humanities
	UCLA Center for Digital Humanities, Intro to Digital Humanities (expansive resources based on Johanna Drucker and David Kim's DH 101  course at UCLA; includes concepts & readings, tutorials, exercises,  student projects, and advanced topics)
	TaDiRAH. (see also about TaDiRAH) (taxonomy of   digital-humanities activities, objects, and techniques)


	Orientation on the Field (selected) 

	A Companion to Digital Humanities, ed. Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, and John Unsworth (Blackwell, 2004) [full text online]
	A Companion to Digital Literary Studies, ed. Ray Siemens and Susan Schreibman (Blackwell, 2007) [full text online]
	Debates in the Digital Humanities, ed. Matthew K. Gold (U. Minnesota Press, 2012) [full text online] 
	DH- and New Media-friendly Journals (journals known for publications related to digital humanities and new media studies) 
	History of Digital Humanities Field:

	Susan Hockey, "The History of Humanities Computing" (2004)
	John Unsworth, "What’s 'Digital Humanities' and How Did It Get Here?" (2012)
	Meredith Hindley, "The Rise of the Machines--NEH and the Digital Humanities: The Early Years" (2013) 
	Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, "What is Digital Humanities and What's It Doing in English Departments?" [PDF] (2010)


	Getting Started with Digital Humanities

	DevDH.org lessons on getting started in DH
	Crystal S. Anderson, "Digital Humanities for the Rest of Us" (2016) (on taking "baby steps" into DH) 
	Mary Axford, Discipline-Specific Tools: Digital Humanities (2014)

	1 - What’s the Right Toolset for Digital Humanities?
	2 - Literature
	3 - History 

	Andrew Goldstone, "Notes on Using Digital Media for First-Year Graduate Students" (2016) ("My department asked me to meet with our first-year Ph.D. students to talk about “Using Digital Media” in their scholarly lives. It was interesting to try to sketch an outline of what I thought a starting English Ph.D. student should hear on the topic, and I thought I’d post a copy of that outline here...")
	Adeline Koh, "Introducing Digital Humanities Work to Undergraduates: An Overview" (2014) ("brief overview of an assortment of digital humanities projects that can be implemented in primarily undergraduate-focused institutions")
	Paige Morgan, "How to Get a Digital Humanities Project Off the Ground" (2014) 
	Trevor Owens, "Where to Start? On Research Questions in The Digital Humanities" (2014) 
	Lisa Spiro, "Getting Started in Digital Humanities" (2011)
	George H. Williams, "The Question of Inclusion in the Digital Humanities" (includes sections on Starting Places and Readings for beginners in DH) 


	Creating and Maintaining an Online Scholarly Presence

	Gerald R. Lucas, "Social Media: Top Ten Practices" (2013) ("My list of best practices for faculty in higher education teaching with social media") 
	Kelli Marshall, "How to Curate Your Digital Identity as an Academic" (2015) 
	Academic/Professional Blogging

	Tim Hitchcock, "Doing It In Public: Impact, Blogging, Social Media and the Academy" (2014)
	Rohan Maitzen, "Blogging: Accept No Substitutes!" (2013)
	Ernesto Priego, "Some Tips for WordPress.com Beginners" (2014)
	Writing For Research, "How to Write a Blogpost From Your Journal Article" (2015) 
	See also: Jenny Davis on citing blogs in academic research (2013) 

	Academic/Professional Twitter 

	Ryan Cordell, "How to Start Tweeting (and Why You Might Want To)"  [paywalled]
	Dorothy Bishop, "A Gentle Introduction to Twitter for the Apprehensive Academic 
	Christopher Long, "The Tweeting Graduate Student"
	See also these posts and resources on academic tweeting: Tim Hitchcock on the importance of the academic use of Twitter and blogs (2014); Carl Straumsheim, "Twitter Has the Chatter" (2014)


	DH Project-Making

	Johanna Drucker, Workflow for Planning Digital Projects [PDF] (2014)


	Digitization

	Stephanie Routhier Perry, "Digitization and Digital Preservation: A Review of the Literature" (2014) (introduction to concepts, methods, techniques for digitizing resources)



    

  
  


  


  
        	
  Guides and Introductions

      
    	
      


      	
      
			  
					     Page Tools

                    
      
        Insert links

        Insert links to other pages or uploaded files.

      

      
        Pages
        Images and files
      

  
      
          
            Insert a link to a new page

            	 Loading...



          

          
                            	No images or files uploaded yet.


			        Insert image from URL

          

	    

    

			  

        
            Tip: To turn text into a link, highlight the text, then click on a page or file from the list above.
        

		  


	

 


  


  

  



  
    Comments (0)
      

  [bookmark: comments]
  





You don't have permission to comment on this page.





  
  
    Printable version
  





                      	 



      
        
          

          

        

        



  
    PBworks  / Help

    Terms of use / Privacy policy
  




  
        About this workspace
            

    Contact the owner /         RSS feed /     This workspace is public
  




        
          

          

        

      

    

  	
      
    
      

      
    

      
                        
      Join this workspace


      
        

                     
                          To join this workspace,
              request access.            

            Already have an account? Log in!

                              

      

      

      

    

      
              
  Navigator
 
  
    Loading…

  

 


                
  SideBar
 
    
      Home


Guides & Intros

Tutorials

DH Tools

DH Examples

Data Collections & Datasets


Alan Liu's Recent Digital Humanities Courses:

	 English 149 (Undergrad, Fall 2014)
	English 197 (Undergrad, Spring 2015)
	English 236 (Graduate, Fall 2014)


          

   


                            
  Recent Activity
 
  
    
      Show 0 new items
    
  

  
    Loading…

  

 


            

    

  




      



    
[image: Quantcast]



