
  
    Skip to main content
  

    

  
  

          
      

        
                  
          

                          centerNet

            
                          An international network of digital humanities centers

            
          


        
      

    
        Menu
  
      Main menu

  
  	Home
	About
	Centers
	Contact
	Initiatives
	Join
	centerNet News


  

  

  
    

                  
      
      
      
        

          
          

                                    
            
                          
                  
      About centerNet

  
  centerNet is an international network of digital humanities centers formed for cooperative and collaborative action to benefit digital humanities and allied fields in general, and centers as humanities cyberinfrastructure in particular. Anchored by its new publication DHCommons, centerNet enables individual DH Centers to network internationally — sharing and building on projects, tools, staff, and expertise. Through initiatives such as Day(s) of DH and Resources for Starting and Sustaining DH Centers, centerNet provides a virtual DH center for isolated DH projects and platform for educating the broader scholarly community about Digital Humanities.

Read more


    
      centerNet News

  
  
        
  
  
      
        
    

  
  
      

      
              
          CFP: Calling for Proposals to Host Day of DH in 2017 and 2018
        

      
              Submitted by kdalziel2@unl.edu on Mon, 05/23/2016 - 10:47

      
    
  
  
  
  A Day in the Life of the Digital Humanities (Day of DH) is an open community initiative sponsored by centerNet that each year brings together scholars interested in the digital humanities from around the world to document what they do on one day. The goal is to create a website that weaves together a picture of the participants’ activities on the day and which answers the question, ‘Just what do digital humanists really do?’ Participants document their day through photographs and text, all of which is published on a community online platform, forming a record of the day.



  


      	Read more about CFP: Calling for Proposals to Host Day of DH in 2017 and 2018


  
  

  

    

  
  
  
  
  
  


    
      News from centerNet Centers

  
  
        
  
  
      
        
      
          Call for Papers / Call for Participation: Information+ 2018, 9-21 October, University of Applied Sciences Potsdam (FH Potsdam) / 21-26 October, IEEE VIS, Berlin
  
  
      Posted    Monday, May 7, 2018 - 03:37    
      by    Textgrid    
          via Prof. Dr. Marian Dörk, Potsdam
INFORMATION+ 2018
Interdisciplinary practices in information design & visualization
19–21 October 2018
University of Applied Sciences Potsdam
Potsdam, Germany
Following the success of the inaugural Information+ 2016 in Vancouver, the biennial conference brings together researchers and practitioners in information design and information...  
  
          Read full post (external link)  
  

  
      
          LDC at LREC 2018: Monday May 7
  
  
      Posted    Sunday, May 6, 2018 - 16:19    
      by    Linguistic Data...    
          


LDC is participating in a workshop and tutorial today at LREC 2018.
During the Games4NLP: Games and Gamification for Natural Language Processing Workshop from 9:00-13:00 in the Ivory Room, LDC’s Chris Cieri presents LingoBoingo: Joining Forces to Promote Games for Linguistic Research and Technology Development. 
Then in the afternoon from 14:00-18:00 in the Crystal Room, LDC’s...  
  
          Read full post (external link)  
  

  
      
          Digital Classicist, London Summer seminar series 2018 programme
  
  
      Posted    Friday, May 4, 2018 - 16:15    
      by    UCL Centre for ...    
          The Digital Classicist London 2018 seminar programme is now confirmed and published online. The seminar series this year addresses the tension between standardisation and customisation in digital and other innovative and collaborative classics research. The topic encompasses all areas of classics, including ancient history, archaeology and reception (including cultures beyond the Mediterranean)....  
  
          Read full post (external link)  
  

  
      
          Stellenausschreibung: Wiss. Mitarbeiter/in Digitale Edition an der HAB Wolfenbüttel
  
  
      Posted    Friday, May 4, 2018 - 05:29    
      by    Textgrid    
          An der Herzog August Bibliothek ist zum nächstmöglichen Zeitpunkt eine befristete Stelle (0,5) für eine/n wiss. Mitarbeiter/in zur technisch-editorischen Betreuung einer Edition zu besetzen. Es handelt sich um eine Stelle im Projekt „Kritische Gesamtausgabe der Schriften und Briefe Andreas Bodensteins von Karlstadt, Teil III“.
Die vollständige Ausschreibung findet sich unter:http://www.hab.de/de/...  
  
          Read full post (external link)  
  

  
      
          LDC at LREC 2018
  
  
      Posted    Thursday, May 3, 2018 - 09:54    
      by    Linguistic Data...    
          


LDC will attend the 11th Language Resource Evaluation Conference (LREC2018), hosted by ELRA, the European Language Resource Association. The conference will be held in Miyazaki, Japan from May 7-12 and features a broad range of sessions on language resource and human language technologies research. Six LDC staff members will be presenting current work on topics including simple semantic...  
  
          Read full post (external link)  
  

  
      
          Infrastructures of the Imagination
  
  
      Posted    Wednesday, May 2, 2018 - 19:12    
      by    Media Arts + Pr...    
          

		Opening Reception: May 17, 5:30-9pmGallery Hours: May 18 and May 21-23, 10am-5pmLocation: Firehouse Gallery, USC School of Cinematic Arts639 West 32nd Street, Los Angeles, CA 90007
	

                Facebook Event
	

The post Infrastructures of the Imagination appeared first on USC Media Arts + Practice.  
  
          Read full post (external link)  
  

  
      
          IASSIST Quarterly Volume 41 available--on a new web site!
  
  
      Posted    Wednesday, May 2, 2018 - 13:56    
      by    IASSIS    
          Welcome to the first issue of Volume 41 of the IASSIST Quarterly. It has taken extra time for this issue to appear. The cause of this is not that we have been extra lazy.  The paradoxical cause is that a great many people have been extra busy. Thanks to the team of people in the editorial group of the IASSIST Quarterly and - not least - the great help from Sonya Betz working as Digital...  
  
          Read full post (external link)  
  

  
      
          DARIAH-DE Grand Tour 2018: Panels versprechen spannende Diskussionen
  
  
      Posted    Wednesday, May 2, 2018 - 11:33    
      by    Textgrid    
          Zum abwechslungsreichen Programm der DARIAH-DE Grand Tour 2018 (19. bis 21. September an der TU Darmstadt) gehören nicht nur zahlreiche Workshops und die Keynote von Prof. Marc Alexander (University of Glasgow), sondern ebenfalls zwei spannende Paneldiskussionen.
So werden die Teilnehmenden im Panel Geistes- und kulturwissenschaftliche Forschungsdaten: Konzepte und...  
  
          Read full post (external link)  
  

  
      
          Workshopbericht „Reisewege in Raum und Zeit”, Köln, 27.02.2018
  
  
      Posted    Wednesday, May 2, 2018 - 10:10    
      by    Textgrid    
          Am 27.02.2018 fand der DARIAH-DE-Expertenworkshop „Reisewege in Raum und Zeit” im Rahmen der DHd-Jahrestagung in Köln statt. Der Workshop war dem Thema Reisewege historischer Akteure gewidmet und wurde gemeinsam vom Leibniz-Institut für Europäische Geschichte (Anna Aschauer, Marco Büchler) und dem Lehrstuhl für Medieninformatik der Otto-Friedrich-Universität Bamberg (Tobias Gradl, Andreas Henrich...  
  
          Read full post (external link)  
  

  
      
          UCLDH hosted BL Labs roadshow, April 2018
  
  
      Posted    Tuesday, May 1, 2018 - 07:05    
      by    UCL Centre for ...    
          UCLDH were pleased to host the British Library Labs team on 24th April for their 2018 roadshow. This is the third time UCLDH have hosted the BL Labs, and the success and popularity of the now annual event continues to grow, with over 70 people registered this year.
This year’s event included a series of presentations exploring the British Library’s digital collections, how they have been used in...  
  
          Read full post (external link)  
  

    

  
      Pages
	1
	2
	3
	4
	5
	6
	7
	8
	9
	next ›
	last »


  
  
  
  
  


                

            
            
          

          
        

      


              
      Featured Centers

  
  
        
  
  
      
        
      
          Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH)
  
  
          College Park, MD, United States
  
  
            
  
          http://mith.umd.edu/
  
  

  
      
          UCL Centre for Digital Humanities
  
  
          London, United Kingdom
  
  
            
  
          http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dh
  
  

  
      
          Electronic Textual Cultures Lab
  
  
          University of Victoria PO Box 1700 STN CSC Victoria BC, Canada V8W 2Y2
  
  
            
  
          http://etcl.uvic.ca/
  
  

  
      
          Centre d'etudes superieures de la renaissance
  
  
          Tours, France
  
  
            
  
          http://cesr.univ-tours.fr/
  
  

  
      
          Digital Scholarship Lab
  
  
          Richmond, VA, United States
  
  
            
  
          http://dsl.richmond.edu/
  
  

  
      
          Institut des Sciences Sociales - LaDHUL
  
  
          University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
  
  
            
  
          http://www.unil.ch/ladhul/fr/home/menuinst/membres.html
  
  

    

  
  
  
  
  
  



  


      
    

  


      
              
      Initiatives

  
  DHCommons

centerNet’s new publication, DHCommons, is merging with Arts-Humanities.net to create one large-scale discovery and review publication for digital humanities projects.  

Resources for Starting and Sustaining DH Centers

The Resources page lists talks, articles, sample DH proposals and other sources of information about ways to start and sustain DH centers. 


Day(s) of DH

A Day of the Life of the Digital Humanities, an event where digital humanists from around the world document what they do.

Read more



  
  
      Becoming a Member

  
  If you think your center is a digital humanities center, in whole or in part, then we’d be glad to have you join centerNet. We leave the definition of “digital humanities” up to you, but we intend to be inclusive, and we know that there will be cross-over into the social sciences, media studies, digital arts, and other related areas. This might include humanities centers with a strong interest in or focus on digital platforms.  One caveat—a “center” should be larger than a single project, and it should have some history or promise of persistence. To see a list our Founding Centers from around the world, click here.

Read more



  
  
      Search

  
  
    
  Search 
 











  



      

    
  



  