



Skip to Content
 | 
Skip to Table of Contents




	
	
 
 [image: Return to the MLA Commons]
				
		Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities


		Concepts, Models, and Experiments

		

	

	
	
		


Search for:








	

	
	



	Log in









	







	











	Next page 


		Welcome


	





	Site Home Page
	Title Page
	General Comments
	All Comments
	Comments by Commenter
	Blog
	Blog Archive





	Minimise Header























































		Welcome




		
		[image: ]
		Angela Gibson

		Thursday, July 2nd, 2015


			




	¶ 1
Leave a comment on paragraph 1 0
Welcome to the open peer-review site for Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities: Concepts, Models, and Experiments, a curated collection of reusable and remixable pedagogical artifacts for humanities scholars in development by the Modern Language Association.

¶ 2
Leave a comment on paragraph 2 0
Each keyword entry that you see on the right column of this site is curated by an experienced practitioner of digital pedagogy, who briefly contextualizes a pedagogical concept and then provides ten supporting artifacts, such as syllabi, prompts, exercises, lesson plans, and student work drawn from courses, classrooms, and projects across the humanities. These artifacts are annotated and accompanied by lists of related materials for further reading. The collection is published under a Creative Commons BY-NC license to encourage circulation, editing, and repurposing by other practitioners.

¶ 3
Leave a comment on paragraph 3 1
Eventually, fifty keywords will compose the project, which is currently undergoing public peer review. New keywords will be added in batches throughout 2016. We invite you to read through and respond to each of these entries, and we welcome feedback from a wide range of practitioners at all levels of experience. When commenting on keywords, please consider the following:

	¶ 4
Leave a comment on paragraph 4 0

	Clarity of curator’s statement: Is the curator’s rationale clear? Do the artifacts below it fulfill the promises of the curatorial statement?
	Selection and presentation of artifacts: Does the keyword provide a broad range of sample artifacts? Are those artifacts annotated well? Are there any major gaps that should be addressed?
	Applicability: Does the keyword provide a wide range of starting points for a scholar interested in engaging in digital pedagogy work?


¶ 5
Leave a comment on paragraph 5 0
While anyone may comment, we hope you’ll join the MLA and become part of the Commons community.

¶ 6
Leave a comment on paragraph 6 0
Thank you in advance for your feedback. Please visit our how to comment page if you have further questions about the process.




	


	


	Page 1







































	
Contents


	
Comments


	
	Activity

		













Comments























1 Comment on the whole Page




	







[image: ]

Www.Bbkshopping.com
November 20, 2017 at 9:12 pm







Comment awaiting moderation




















Leave a comment on the whole Page









0 Comments on paragraph 1





Leave a comment on paragraph 1









0 Comments on paragraph 2





Leave a comment on paragraph 2









1 Comment on paragraph 3




	







[image: ]

Vimala Pasupathi
August 8, 2017 at 10:36 am







Comment awaiting moderation




















Leave a comment on paragraph 3









0 Comments on paragraph 4





Leave a comment on paragraph 4









0 Comments on paragraph 5





Leave a comment on paragraph 5









0 Comments on paragraph 6





Leave a comment on paragraph 6





























	Cancel






Leave a Comment



	
		

		

			Your details

			
				Name (required)

				


				Mail (will not be published) (required)

				


				Website

				


			
		


		

			Your comment

			Comment
			








		


		
		




		
		


		


		


		
















































Table of Contents











	Welcome
	Description
	How to Comment
	Keywords
	Access (George H. Williams) 
	Affect (Elizabeth Losh) 
	Annotation (Paul Schacht) 
	Archive (Lauren Coats and Gabrielle Dean) 
	Assessment (J. Elizabeth Clark) 
	Authorship (Augusta Rohrbach) 
	Blogging (Diane K. Jakacki) 
	Classroom (Joyce R. Walker) 
	Code (Lauren Klein) 
	Collaboration (Amanda Licastro, Katina Rogers, and Danica Savonick) 
	Community (Bridget Draxler and Jon Winet) 
	Community College (Anne B. McGrail, Dominique Zino, Jaime Cardenas, and Bethany Holmstrom) 
	Curation (Julia Flanders) 
	Design (Jennifer Sheppard and Kristin L. Arola) 
	Diaspora (Jessica Marie Johnson) 
	Digital Divides (Annemarie Perez) 
	Disability (Melanie Yergeau) 
	ePortfolio (Kathleen Blake Yancey) 
	Failure (Brian Croxall and Quinn Warnick) 
	Fiction (Chris Forster) 
	Fieldwork (Colette Colligan and Michelle Levy) 
	Future(s) (André Carrington) 
	Gaming (Amanda Phillips) 
	Gender (Anne Cong-Huyen) 
	Hacking (William J. Turkel) 
	Hashtag (Marisa Parham) 
	History (Shawn Graham) 
	Hybrid (Jesse Stommel) 
	Indigenous (David Gaertner, Karyn Recollet, Elizabeth LaPensée) 
	Information (Tanya E. Clement and Daniel Carter) 
	Interface (Kathi Inman Berens) 
	Intersectionality (Roopika Risam) 
	Iteration (Annette Vee) 
	Labor (Spencer D.C. Keralis) 
	Language Learning (Ana Oskoz) 
	Makerspaces (David M. Rieder and Jessica Elam-Handloff) 
	Mapping (Diana S. Sinton) 
	Multimodal (Virginia Kuhn) 
	Network (Maha Bali and Mia Zamora) 
	Online (Amy Collier) 
	Open (Michael Roy) 
	Play (Mark Sample) 
	Poetry (Chuck Rybak) 
	Praxis (Bethany Nowviskie, Jeremy Boggs, and J. K. Purdom Lindblad) 
	Professionalization (Jennifer Guiliano) 
	Project Management (Lynne Siemens) 
	Prototype (Stan Ruecker, Celso Scaletsky, Guilherme Meyer, Chiara Del Gaudio, Piotr Michura, and Gerry Derksen) 
	Public (Jeffrey W. McClurken) 
	Queer (Edmond Y. Chang) 
	Race (Adeline Koh) 
	Reading (Rachel Sagner Buurma) 
	Remix (Kim Middleton) 
	Rhetoric (Douglas Eyman) 
	Sexuality (Alexis Lothian) 
	Social Justice (Toniesha Taylor) 
	Sound (Steph Ceraso) 
	Storytelling (Bryan Alexander) 
	Text Analysis (Natalie M. Houston) 
	Video (Daniel Anderson and Jason Loan) 
	Visualization (Stéfan Sinclair and Geoffrey Rockwell) 


	





















Activity


















Recent Comments in this Document




	





[image: ]
Polina Vinogradova
February 8, 2017 at 12:24 pm







Ana, when you write “reject a negative identity,” do you mean negative self-view or view of themselves? It might be useful to clarify this as some identity scholars argue that we don’t have multiple identities, but rather multiple layers and aspects of our identities.





See in context







	





[image: ]
Philippe Seminet
February 7, 2017 at 6:53 pm







One further artifact that might fit the bill nicely with what you have provided below, even though it has been around for a decade or more, is the use of Second Life for language learning purposes, as this short piece in Omniglot attests: http://www.omniglot.com/language/articles/secondlife.php





See in context







	





[image: ]
Polina Vinogradova
February 7, 2017 at 6:51 pm







Ana, you certainly make a clear connection between communicative competence and the availability of digital tools for language learning in paragraph 6. But I am wondering if it might be useful to redefine communicative competence here adding multiliteracies component (the ability to critically interpret and convey multimodal messages). There seems to be a bit of a disconnect here right now between the definition of communicative competence that language learning relies on and further discussion of resourcefulness and usefulness of digital tools. I think it would strengthen the argument.





See in context







	





[image: ]
Philippe Seminet
February 7, 2017 at 6:49 pm







While I agree on the whole with the move beyond linguistic elements given the awesome technology available (great artifacts provided in this piece!), I do find problematic the notion that language-learning is not about grammar. While true for L1, I don’t see why you’d avoid explaining past tenses in L2 without referring to how it’s done in L1. Why not use that resource? Yes, the goal is communication, but grammar provides the shorthand whereby you can more readily communicate the desired meaning.





See in context







	





[image: ]
Kathryn Tomasek
February 7, 2017 at 3:45 pm







Hi Julia,

Thank you for including us as an example. Beyond that, I appreciate the variety of examples offered here, since they offer an idea of the range of possibilities with regard to disciplines and tools that might be used in curation assignments. I also appreciate the range of educational levels covered in the examples.

 





See in context







	





[image: ]
John Martin
February 7, 2017 at 3:39 pm







I could see this being taught alongside Melville’s “The Paradise of Bachelors and the Tartarus of Maids” or Laurel Thatcher Ulrich’s A Midwife’s Tale in a course devoted to the history of unseen women’s labor.





See in context







	





[image: ]
Truett Cates
February 7, 2017 at 3:35 pm







perhaps better than “pure linguistic” would be “simply morphological”. since there is no aspect of language not included in “linguistic.”





See in context







	





[image: ]
John Martin
February 7, 2017 at 3:30 pm







This might also be paired with a visit from a Copyright Librarian or other staff member with special expertise in current copyright law, author’s rights, publisher agreements, etc., to allow students to put these discussions into a contemporary setting that might be relevant to those who wish to author or publish their own works.





See in context







	





[image: ]
John Martin
February 7, 2017 at 3:23 pm







I’d be curious to hear more about how this complicating and questioning of the notion of “authorship” also impacts the notion of “authority.”  This is the only paragraph that overtly mentions them together, but in moving away from the notion of the individual genius composing in isolation towards (or back to) more collective, collaborative, and even unintentional or multi-intentional forms of authorship, what are the implications for literary or interpretive authority?





See in context







	





[image: ]
John Martin
February 7, 2017 at 12:56 pm







Do any of the resources below, or the possible assignments using these resources, attempt to measure the actual economic value or impact of digital labor? While this is probably a fluid and relative value, is it possible for students to look at various ways of measuring and attributing economic value, either in terms of “fair wages” or just being able to articulate such value when dealing with institutions, funding agencies, grant applications, budgeting, etc.?





See in context















		Recently Active Members


		

			

				
					[image: Profile picture of Melissa Ridley Elmes]
				


				

					
						Melissa Ridley Elmes
					


					active 13 minutes ago


				


				


			



		


	


	
		Who's Online


		

			

				
					[image: Profile picture of Melissa Ridley Elmes]
				


				

					
						Melissa Ridley Elmes
					


					active 13 minutes ago


				


				


			



		


	

	










































	
			Modern Language Association

			85 Broad Street, suite 500

			New York, NY 10004-2434


			













This site is part of the MLA network on Humanities Commons. Explore other sites on this network or register to build your own.
Source: https://hcommons.org/



















		
				
				

		
		
				Insert/edit link

		Close
		
			
				Enter the destination URL

				
					URL
					
				

				
					Link Text
					
				

				
					
					 Open link in a new tab
				

			

			Or link to existing content

			
				
					
						Search
						
						
					
				

				
					

					
						
					

				

				
					
						No search term specified. Showing recent items.
						Search or use up and down arrow keys to select an item.
					

					

					
						
					

 				

 			

		

		
			
				Cancel
			

			
				
			

		

		

		

		


