		

		

		
			
			



Digital humanities
			
				From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
				

								
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				

				
[image: ]



Example of a textual analysis program being used to study a novel, with Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice in Voyant Tools





Digital humanities (DH) is an area of scholarly activity at the intersection of computing or digital technologies and the disciplines of the humanities. It includes the systematic use of digital resources in the humanities, as well as the reflection on their application.[1][2] DH can be defined as new ways of doing scholarship that involve collaborative, transdisciplinary, and computationally engaged research, teaching, and publishing.[3] It brings digital tools and methods to the study of the humanities with the recognition that the printed word is no longer the main medium for knowledge production and distribution.[3]

By producing and using new applications and techniques, DH makes new kinds of teaching and research possible, while at the same time studying and critiquing how these impact cultural heritage and digital culture.[2] Thus, a distinctive feature of DH is its cultivation of a two-way relationship between the humanities and the digital: the field both employs technology in the pursuit of humanities research and subjects technology to humanistic questioning and interrogation, often simultaneously.





Contents



	1 Definition
	2 History
	3 Values and methods
	4 Tools
	5 Projects
	5.1 Digital archives
	5.2 Cultural analytics
	5.3 Textual mining, analysis, and visualization
	5.4 Analysis of macroscopic trends in cultural change
	5.5 Online publishing



	6 Criticism
	6.1 Negative publicity
	6.2 Black box
	6.3 Diversity
	6.4 Issues of access
	6.5 Cultural criticism
	6.6 Difficulty of evaluation
	6.7 Lack of focus on pedagogy



	7 Organizations
	7.1 Centers and institutes
	7.2 Conferences
	7.3 Journals and publications



	8 See also
	9 References
	10 Bibliography
	11 Further reading
	12 External links






Definition[edit]

The definition of the digital humanities is being continually formulated by scholars and practitioners. Since the field is constantly growing and changing, specific definitions can quickly become outdated or unnecessarily limit future potential.[4] The second volume of Debates in the Digital Humanities (2016) acknowledges the difficulty in defining the field: "Along with the digital archives, quantitative analyses, and tool-building projects that once characterized the field, DH now encompasses a wide range of methods and practices: visualizations of large image sets, 3D modeling of historical artifacts, 'born digital' dissertations, hashtag activism and the analysis thereof, alternate reality games, mobile makerspaces, and more. In what has been called 'big tent' DH, it can at times be difficult to determine with any specificity what, precisely, digital humanities work entails."[5]

Historically, the digital humanities developed out of humanities computing and has become associated with other fields, such as humanistic computing, social computing, and media studies. In concrete terms, the digital humanities embraces a variety of topics, from curating online collections of primary sources (primarily textual) to the data mining of large cultural data sets to topic modeling. Digital humanities incorporates both digitized (remediated) and born-digital materials and combines the methodologies from traditional humanities disciplines (such as history, philosophy, linguistics, literature, art, archaeology, music, and cultural studies) and social sciences,[6] with tools provided by computing (such as hypertext, hypermedia, data visualisation, information retrieval, data mining, statistics, text mining, digital mapping), and digital publishing. Related subfields of digital humanities have emerged like software studies, platform studies, and critical code studies. Fields that parallel the digital humanities include new media studies and information science as well as media theory of composition, game studies, particularly in areas related to digital humanities project design and production, and cultural analytics.

History[edit]

Digital humanities descends from the field of humanities computing, whose origins reach back to the late 1940s in the pioneering work of Jesuit scholar Roberto Busa and the women he employed.[7][8] In collaboration with IBM, they created a computer-generated concordance to Thomas Aquinas' writings known as the Index Thomisticus.[3] Other scholars began using mainframe computers to automate tasks like word-searching, sorting, and counting, which was much faster than processing information from texts with handwritten or typed index cards.[3] In the decades which followed archaeologists, classicists, historians, literary scholars, and a broad array of humanities researchers in other disciplines applied emerging computational methods to transform humanities scholarship.[9][10]

As Tara McPherson has pointed out, the digital humanities also inherit practices and perspectives developed through many artistic and theoretical engagements with electronic screen culture beginning the late 1960s and 1970s. These range from research developed by organizations such as SIGGRAPH to creations by artists such as Charles and Ray Eames and the members of E.A.T. (Experiments in Art and Technology). The Eames and E.A.T. explored nascent computer culture and intermediality in creative works that dovetailed technological innovation with art.[11]

The first specialized journal in the digital humanities was Computers and the Humanities, which debuted in 1966. The Association for Literary and Linguistic Computer (ALLC) and the Association for Computers and the Humanities (ACH) were then founded in 1977 and 1978, respectively.[3]

Soon, there was a need for a standardized protocol for tagging digital texts, and the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) was developed.[3] The TEI project was launched in 1987 and published the first full version of the TEI Guidelines in May 1994.[8] TEI helped shape the field of electronic textual scholarship and led to Extensible Markup Language (XML), which is a tag scheme for digital editing. Researchers also began experimenting with databases and hypertextual editing, which are structured around links and nodes, as opposed to the standard linear convention of print.[3] In the nineties, major digital text and image archives emerged at centers of humanities computing in the U.S. (e.g. the Women Writers Project, the Rossetti Archive,[12] and The William Blake Archive[13]), which demonstrated the sophistication and robustness of text-encoding for literature.[14] The advent of personal computing and the World Wide Web meant that Digital Humanities work could become less centered on text and more on design. The multimedia nature of the internet has allowed Digital Humanities work to incorporate audio, video, and other components in addition to text.[3]

The terminological change from "humanities computing" to "digital humanities" has been attributed to John Unsworth, Susan Schreibman, and Ray Siemens who, as editors of the anthology A Companion to Digital Humanities (2004), tried to prevent the field from being viewed as "mere digitization."[15] Consequently, the hybrid term has created an overlap between fields like rhetoric and composition, which use "the methods of contemporary humanities in studying digital objects,"[15] and digital humanities, which uses "digital technology in studying traditional humanities objects".[15] The use of computational systems and the study of computational media within the arts and humanities more generally has been termed the 'computational turn'.[16]

In 2006 the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) launched the Digital Humanities Initiative (renamed Office of Digital Humanities in 2008), which made widespread adoption of the term "digital humanities" all but irreversible in the United States.[17]

Digital humanities emerged from its former niche status and became "big news"[17] at the 2009 MLA convention in Philadelphia, where digital humanists made "some of the liveliest and most visible contributions"[18] and had their field hailed as "the first 'next big thing' in a long time."[19]

Values and methods[edit]

Although digital humanities projects and initiatives are diverse, they often reflect common values and methods.[20] These can help in understanding this hard-to-define field.[21]

Values

	Critical & Theoretical
	Iterative & Experimental
	Collaborative & Distributed
	Multimodal & Performative
	Open & Accessible


Methods

	Enhanced Critical Curation
	Augmented Editions and Fluid Textuality
	Scale: The Law of Large Numbers
	Distant/Close, Macro/Micro, Surface/Depth
	Cultural Analytics, Aggregation, and Data-Mining
	Visualization and Data Design
	Locative Investigation and Thick Mapping
	The Animated Archive
	Distributed Knowledge Production and Performative Access
	Humanities Gaming
	Code, Software, and Platform Studies
	Database Documentaries
	Repurposable Content and Remix Culture
	Pervasive Infrastructure
	Ubiquitous Scholarship.[20]


In keeping with the value of being open and accessible, many digital humanities projects and journals are open access and/or under Creative Commons licensing, showing the field's "commitment to open standards and open source."[22] Open access is designed to enable anyone with an internet-enabled device and internet connection to view a website or read an article without having to pay, as well as share content with the appropriate permissions.

Digital humanities scholars use computational methods either to answer existing research questions or to challenge existing theoretical paradigms, generating new questions and pioneering new approaches. One goal is to systematically integrate computer technology into the activities of humanities scholars,[23] as is done in contemporary empirical social sciences. Yet despite the significant trend in digital humanities towards networked and multimodal forms of knowledge, a substantial amount of digital humanities focuses on documents and text in ways that differentiate the field's work from digital research in media studies, information studies, communication studies, and sociology. Another goal of digital humanities is to create scholarship that transcends textual sources. This includes the integration of multimedia, metadata, and dynamic environments (see The Valley of the Shadow project at the University of Virginia, the Vectors Journal of Culture and Technology in a Dynamic Vernacular at University of Southern California, or Digital Pioneers projects at Harvard[24]). A growing number of researchers in digital humanities are using computational methods for the analysis of large cultural data sets such as the Google Books corpus.[25] Examples of such projects were highlighted by the Humanities High Performance Computing competition sponsored by the Office of Digital Humanities in 2008,[26] and also by the Digging Into Data challenge organized in 2009[27] and 2011[28] by NEH in collaboration with NSF,[29] and in partnership with JISC in the UK, and SSHRC in Canada.[30] In addition to books, historical newspapers can also be analyzed with big data methods. The analysis of vast quantities of historical newspaper content has showed how periodic structures can be automatically discovered, and a similar analysis was performed on social media.[31][32] As part of the big data revolution, Gender bias, readability, content similarity, reader preferences, and even mood have been analyzed based on text mining methods over millions of documents[33][34][35][36][37] and historical documents written in literary Chinese.[38]

Digital humanities is also involved in the creation of software, providing "environments and tools for producing, curating, and interacting with knowledge that is 'born digital' and lives in various digital contexts."[39] In this context, the field is sometimes known as computational humanities.


[image: ]



Narrative network of US Elections 2012[40]





Tools[edit]

Digital humanities scholars use a variety of digital tools for their research, which may take place in an environment as small as a mobile device or as large as a virtual reality lab. Environments for "creating, publishing and working with digital scholarship include everything from personal equipment to institutes and software to cyberspace."[41] Some scholars use advanced programming languages and databases, while others use less complex tools, depending on their needs. DiRT (Digital Research Tools Directory[42]) offers a registry of digital research tools for scholars. TAPoR (Text Analysis Portal for Research[43]) is a gateway to text analysis and retrieval tools. An accessible, free example of an online textual analysis program is Voyant Tools,[44] which only requires the user to copy and paste either a body of text or a URL and then click the 'reveal' button to run the program. There is also an online list[45] of online or downloadable Digital Humanities tools that are largely free, aimed toward helping students and others who lack access to funding or institutional servers. Free, open source web publishing platforms like WordPress and Omeka are also popular tools.


[image: ]



Example of a visualization tool used to study poetry in a new way with Poemage





Projects[edit]

Digital humanities projects are more likely than traditional humanities work to involve a team or a lab, which may be composed of faculty, staff, graduate or undergraduate students, information technology specialists, and partners in galleries, libraries, archives, and museums. Credit and authorship are often given to multiple people to reflect this collaborative nature, which is different from the sole authorship model in the traditional humanities (and more like the natural sciences).[3]

There are thousands of digital humanities projects, ranging from small-scale ones with limited or no funding to large-scale ones with multi-year financial support. Some are continually updated while others may not be due to loss of support or interest, though they may still remain online in either a beta version or a finished form. The following are a few examples of the variety of projects in the field:[46]

Digital archives[edit]

The Women Writers Project (begun in 1988) is a long-term research project to make pre-Victorian women writers more accessible through an electronic collection of rare texts. The Walt Whitman Archive[47] (begun in the 1990s) sought to create a hypertext and scholarly edition of Whitman’s works and now includes photographs, sounds, and the only comprehensive current bibliography of Whitman criticism. The Emily Dickinson Archive (begun in 2013)[48] is a collection of high-resolution images of Dickinson’s poetry manuscripts as well as a searchable lexicon of over 9,000 words that appear in the poems.


[image: ]



Example of network analysis as an archival tool at the League of Nations.[49]





The Slave Societies Digital Archive[50] (formerly Ecclesiastical and Secular Sources for Slave Societies), directed by Jane Landers[51] and hosted at Vanderbilt University, preserves endangered ecclesiastical and secular documents related to Africans and African-descended peoples in slave societies. This Digital Archive currently holds 500,000 unique images, dating from the 16th to the 20th centuries, and documents the history of between 6 and 8 million individuals. They are the most extensive serial records for the history of Africans in the Atlantic World and also include valuable information on the indigenous, European, and Asian populations who lived alongside them.

Cultural analytics[edit]

"Cultural analytics" refers to the use of computational method for exploration and analysis of large visual collections and also contemporary digital media. The concept was developed in 2005 by Lev Manovich who then established the Cultural Analytics Lab in 2007 at Qualcomm Institute at California Institute for Telecommunication and Information (Calit2). The lab has been using methods from the field of computer science called Computer Vision many types of both historical and contemporary visual media—for example, all covers of Time magazine published between 1923 and 2009,[52] 20,000 historical art photographs from the collection in Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York,[53] one million pages from Manga books,[54] and 16 million images shared on Instagram in 17 global cities.[55] Cultural analytics also includes using methods from media design and data visualization to create interactive visual interfaces for exploration of large visual collections e.g., Selfiecity and On Broadway.

Cultural Analytics research is also addressing a number of theoretical questions. How can we "observe" giant cultural universes of both user-generated and professional media content created today, without reducing them to averages, outliers, or pre-existing categories? How can work with large cultural data help us question our stereotypes and assumptions about cultures? What new theoretical cultural concepts and models are required for studying global digital culture with its new mega-scale, speed, and connectivity?

The term “cultural analytics” (or “culture analytics”) is now used by many other researchers, as exemplified by two academic symposiums,[56] a four-month long research program at UCLA that brought together 120 leading researchers from university and industry labs,[57] an academic peer-review Journal of Cultural Analytics: CA established in 2016,[58] and academic job listings.

Textual mining, analysis, and visualization[edit]

WordHoard (begun in 2004) is a free application that enables scholarly but non-technical users to read and analyze, in new ways, deeply-tagged texts, including the canon of Early Greek epic, Chaucer, Shakespeare, and Spenser. The Republic of Letters (begun in 2008)[59] seeks to visualize the social network of Enlightenment writers through an interactive map and visualization tools. Network analysis and data visualization is also used for reflections on the field itself – researchers may produce network maps of social media interactions or infographics from data on digital humanities scholars and projects.


[image: ]



Network analysis: graph of Digital Humanities Twitter users





Analysis of macroscopic trends in cultural change[edit]

Culturomics is a form of computational lexicology that studies human behavior and cultural trends through the quantitative analysis of digitized texts.[60][61] Researchers data mine large digital archives to investigate cultural phenomena reflected in language and word usage.[62] The term is an American neologism first described in a 2010 Science article called Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books, co-authored by Harvard researchers Jean-Baptiste Michel and Erez Lieberman Aiden.[63]

A 2017 study[37] published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America compared the trajectory of n-grams over time in both digitised books from the 2010 Science article[63] with those found in a large corpus of regional newspapers from the United Kingdom over the course of 150 years. The study further went on to use more advanced Natural language processing techniques to discover macroscopic trends in history and culture, including gender bias, geographical focus, technology, and politics, along with accurate dates for specific events.

Online publishing[edit]

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (begun in 1995) is a dynamic reference work of terms, concepts, and people from philosophy maintained by scholars in the field. MLA Commons offers an open peer-review site (where anyone can comment) for their ongoing curated collection of teaching artifacts in Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities: Concepts, Models, and Experiments (2016). The Debates in the Digital Humanities platform contains volumes of the open-access book of the same title (2012 and 2016 editions) and allows readers to interact with material by marking sentences as interesting or adding terms to a crowdsourced index.

Criticism[edit]

Lauren F. Klein and Matthew K. Gold have identified a range of criticisms in the digital humanities field: "'a lack of attention to issues of race, class, gender, and sexuality; a preference for research-driven projects over pedagogical ones; an absence of political commitment; an inadequate level of diversity among its practitioners; an inability to address texts under copyright; and an institutional concentration in well-funded research universities".[64] Some of the concerns have given rise to the emergent subfield of Critical Digital Humanities (CDH).

Negative publicity[edit]

Klein and Gold note that many appearances of the digital humanities in public media are often in a critical fashion. Armand Leroi, writing in The New York Times, discusses the contrast between the algorithmic analysis of themes in literary texts and the work of Harold Bloom, who qualitatively and phenomenologically analyzes the themes of literature over time. Leroi questions whether or not the digital humanities can provide a truly robust analysis of literature and social phenomenon or offer a novel alternative perspective on them. The literary theorist Stanley Fish claims that the digital humanities pursue a revolutionary agenda and thereby undermine the conventional standards of "pre-eminence, authority and disciplinary power."[65] However, digital humanities scholars note that "Digital Humanities is an extension of traditional knowledge skills and methods, not a replacement for them. Its distinctive contributions do not obliterate the insights of the past, but add and supplement the humanities' long-standing commitment to scholarly interpretation, informed research, structured argument, and dialogue within communities of practice".[3]

Some have hailed the digital humanities as a solution to the apparent problems within the humanities, namely a decline in funding, a repeat of debates, and a fading set of theoretical claims and methodological arguments.[66] Adam Kirsch, writing in the New Republic, calls this the "False Promise" of the digital humanities.[67] While the rest of humanities and many social science departments are seeing a decline in funding or prestige, the digital humanities has been seeing increasing funding and prestige. Burdened with the problems of novelty, the digital humanities is discussed as either a revolutionary alternative to the humanities as it is usually conceived or as simply new wine in old bottles. Kirsch believes that digital humanities practitioners suffer from problems of being marketers rather than scholars, who attest to the grand capacity of their research more than actually performing new analysis and when they do so, only performing trivial parlor tricks of research. This form of criticism has been repeated by others, such as in Carl Staumshein, writing in Inside Higher Education, who calls it a "Digital Humanities Bubble".[68] Later in the same publication, Straumshein alleges that the digital humanities is a 'Corporatist Restructuring' of the Humanities.[69] Some see the alliance of the digital humanities with business to be a positive turn that causes the business world to pay more attention, thus bringing needed funding and attention to the humanities.[70] If it were not burdened by the title of digital humanities, it could escape the allegations that it is elitist and unfairly funded.[71]

Black box[edit]

There has also been critique of the use of digital humanities tools by scholars who do not fully understand what happens to the data they input and place too much trust in the "black box" of software that cannot be sufficiently examined for errors.[72] Johanna Drucker, a professor at UCLA Department of Information Studies, has criticized the "epistemological fallacies" prevalent in popular visualization tools and technologies (such as Google's n-gram graph) used by digital humanities scholars and the general public, calling some network diagramming and topic modeling tools "just too crude for humanistic work."[73] The lack of transparency in these programs obscures the subjective nature of the data and its processing, she argues, as these programs "generate standard diagrams based on conventional algorithms for screen display...mak[ing] it very difficult for the semantics of the data processing to be made evident."[73]

Diversity[edit]

There has also been some recent controversy among practitioners of digital humanities around the role that race and/or identity politics plays. Tara McPherson attributes some of the lack of racial diversity in digital humanities to the modality of UNIX and computers themselves.[74] An open thread on DHpoco.org recently garnered well over 100 comments on the issue of race in digital humanities, with scholars arguing about the amount that racial (and other) biases affect the tools and texts available for digital humanities research.[75] McPherson posits that there needs to be an understanding and theorizing of the implications of digital technology and race, even when the subject for analysis appears not to be about race.

Amy E. Earhart criticizes what has become the new digital humanities "canon" in the shift from websites using simple HTML to the usage of the TEI and visuals in textual recovery projects.[76] Works that has been previously lost or excluded were afforded a new home on the internet, but much of the same marginalizing practices found in traditional humanities also took place digitally. According to Earhart, there is a "need to examine the canon that we, as digital humanists, are constructing, a canon that skews toward traditional texts and excludes crucial work by women, people of color, and the GLBTQ community."[76]

Issues of access[edit]

Practitioners in digital humanities are also failing to meet the needs of users with disabilities. George H. Williams argues that universal design is imperative for practitioners to increase usability because "many of the otherwise most valuable digital resources are useless for people who are—for example—deaf or hard of hearing, as well as for people who are blind, have low vision, or have difficulty distinguishing particular colors."[77] In order to provide accessibility successfully, and productive universal design, it is important to understand why and how users with disabilities are using the digital resources while remembering that all users approach their informational needs differently.[77]

Cultural criticism[edit]

Digital humanities have been criticized for not only ignoring traditional questions of lineage and history in the humanities, but lacking the fundamental cultural criticism that defines the humanities. However, it remains to be seen whether or not the humanities have to be tied to cultural criticism, per se, in order to be the humanities.[78][10] The sciences[vague] see the Digital Humanities as a welcome improvement over the non-quantitative and repetitive historically popular methods of the humanities and social sciences.[79][80]

Difficulty of evaluation[edit]

As the field matures, there has been a recognition that the standard model of academic peer-review of work may not be adequate for digital humanities projects, which often involve website components, databases, and other non-print objects. Evaluation of quality and impact thus require a combination of old and new methods of peer review.[3] One response has been the creation of the DHCommons Journal. This accepts non-traditional submissions, especially mid-stage digital projects, and provides an innovative model of peer review more suited for the multimedia, transdisciplinary, and milestone-driven nature of Digital Humanities projects. Other professional humanities organizations, such as the American Historical Association and the Modern Language Association, have developed guidelines for evaluating academic digital scholarship.[81][82]

Lack of focus on pedagogy[edit]

The 2012 edition of Debates in the Digital Humanities recognized the fact that pedagogy was the “neglected ‘stepchild’ of DH” and included an entire section on teaching the digital humanities.[5] Part of the reason is that grants in the humanities are geared more toward research with quantifiable results rather than teaching innovations, which are harder to measure.[5] In recognition of a need for more scholarship on the area of teaching, Digital Humanities Pedagogy was published and offered case studies and strategies to address how to teach digital humanities methods in various disciplines.

Organizations[edit]

The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO) is an umbrella organization that supports digital research and teaching as a consultative and advisory force for its constituent organizations. Its governance was approved in 2005 and it has overseen the annual Digital Humanities conference since 2006.[83] The current members of ADHO are:

	Australasian Association for Digital Humanities (aaDH)
	Association for Computers and the Humanities (ACH)
	Canadian Society for Digital Humanities / Société canadienne des humanités numériques (CSDH/SCHN)
	centerNet, an international network of digital humanities centers
	The European Association for Digital Humanities (EADH)
	Japanese Association for Digital Humanities (JADH)
	Humanistica, L'association francophone des humanités numériques/digitales (Humanistica)


ADHO funds a number of projects such as the Digital Humanities Quarterly journal and the Digital Scholarship in the Humanities (DSH) journal, supports the Text Encoding Initiative, and sponsors workshops and conferences, as well as funding small projects, awards, and bursaries.[84]

HASTAC (Humanities, Arts, Science, and Technology Alliance and Collaboratory) is a free and open access virtual, interdisciplinary community focused on changing teaching and learning through the sharing of news, tools, methods, and pedagogy, including digital humanities scholarship.[85] It is reputed to be the world's first and oldest academic social network.[85]

Centers and institutes[edit]

	Department of Digital Humanities (King's College London, UK)
	Humanities Advanced Technology and Information Institute (University of Glasgow, Scotland)
	Sussex Humanities Lab (University of Sussex, UK)
	Humlab, Umeå University (Sweden)
	Digital Humanities Summer Institute (DHSI) (University of Victoria, Canada)
	Heidelberg Centre for Digital Humanities (Heidelberg University, Germany)
	The European Summer University in Digital Humanities (Leipzig University, Germany)
	Cultural Analytics Lab (The Graduate Center, City University of New York, USA, and Qualcomm Institute, USA)
	Center for Digital Research in the Humanities (University of Nebraska-Lincoln, USA)
	Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities (University of Virginia, USA)
	Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (University of Maryland, USA)
	Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media (George Mason University, Virginia, USA)
	UCL Centre for Digital Humanities (University College London, UK)
	Center for Public History and Digital Humanities (Cleveland State University, USA)
	Center for Digital Scholarship and Curation (Washington State University, USA)
	Scholars' Lab (University of Virginia, USA)
	Centre for Digital Humanities Research (Australian National University, AU)
	Helsinki Centre for Digital Humanities (HELDIG) (University of Helsinki, Finland)
	Laboratory for digital cultures and humanities of the University of Lausanne (LaDHUL) (University of Lausanne, Switzerland)
	Centre for Information-Modeling, Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities (ZIM-ACDH) (University of Graz, Austria)


Conferences[edit]

	Digital Humanities conference
	THATCamp
	Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) conference


Journals and publications[edit]

	Digital Humanities Quarterly (DHQ) [image: open access publication – free to read]
	DHCommons
	Digital Literary Studies
	Digital Medievalist
	Digital Scholarship in the Humanities (DSH) (formerly Literary and Linguistic Computing)
	Digital Studies / Le champ numérique (DS/CN) [image: open access publication – free to read]
	Humanités numériques (Humanistica) [image: open access publication – free to read]
	Journal of Digital Archives and Digital Humanities
	Journal of Digital and Media Literacy
	Journal of Digital Humanities (JDH)
	Journal of Interactive Technology and Pedagogy
	Journal of the Japanese Association for Digital Humanities (JJADH)
	Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative
	Kairos
	Southern Spaces
	Umanistica Digitale (AIUCD) [image: open access publication – free to read]


See also[edit]

	Cyborg anthropology
	Digital anthropology


References[edit]


	^ Drucker, Johanna (September 2013). "Intro to Digital Humanities: Introduction". UCLA Center for Digital Humanities. Retrieved December 26, 2016. 
	^ a b Terras, Melissa (December 2011). "Quantifying Digital Humanities" (PDF). UCL Centre for Digital Humanities. Retrieved December 26, 2016. 
	^ a b c d e f g h i j k Burdick, Anne; Drucker, Johanna; Lunenfeld, Peter; Presner, Todd; Schnapp, Jeffrey (November 2012). Digital_Humanities (PDF). Open Access eBook: MIT Press. ISBN 9780262312097. 
	^ Warwick, Claire; Terras, Melissa; Nyhan, Julianne (2012-10-09). Digital Humanities in Practice. Facet Publishing. ISBN 9781856047661. 
	^ a b c "Debates in the Digital Humanities". dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu. Retrieved 2016-12-29. 
	^ "Digital Humanities Network". University of Cambridge. Retrieved 27 December 2012. 
	^ Svensson, Patrik (2009). "Humanities Computing as Digital Humanities". Digital Humanities Quarterly. 3 (3). ISSN 1938-4122. Retrieved 2012-05-30. 
	^ a b Hockney, Susan (2004). "The History of Humanities Computing". In Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, John Unsworth (eds.). Companion to Digital Humanities. Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture. Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 1405103213. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
	^ Feeney, Mary & Ross, Seamus (1994). "Information Technology in Humanities Scholarship, British Achievements, Prospects, and Barriers". Historical Social Research. 19 (1 (69)): 3–59. JSTOR 20755828. 
	^ a b Berry, David M.; Fagerjord, Anders (2017). Digital Humanities: Knowledge and Critique in a Digital Age. Cambridge: Polity. ISBN 978-0-7456-9765-9. 
	^ McPherson, Tara. "DH by Design: Feminism, aesthetics + the digital.” Congress of the Social Science and Humanities. University of Calgary, 2016-05-31. Keynote.
	^ Jerome J. McGann (ed.), Rossetti Archive, Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities, University of Virginia, retrieved 2012-06-16 
	^ Morris Eaves, Robert Essick, and Joseph Viscomi (eds.), The William Blake Archive, retrieved 2012-06-16 CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
	^ Liu, Alan (2004). "Transcendental Data: Toward a Cultural History and Aesthetics of the New Encoded Discourse". Critical Inquiry. 31 (1): 49–84. doi:10.1086/427302. ISSN 0093-1896. JSTOR 10.1086/427302. 
	^ a b c Fitzpatrick, Kathleen (2011-05-08). "The humanities, done digitally". The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved 2011-07-10. 
	^ Berry, David (2011-06-01). "The Computational Turn: Thinking About the Digital Humanities". Culture Machine. Retrieved 2012-01-31. 
	^ a b Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. (2010). "What is Digital Humanities and What's it Doing in English Departments?" (PDF). ADE Bulletin (150). 
	^ Howard, Jennifer (2009-12-31). "The MLA Convention in Translation". The Chronicle of Higher Education. ISSN 0009-5982. Retrieved 2012-05-31. 
	^ Pannapacker, William (2009-12-28). "The MLA and the Digital Humanities" (The Chronicle of Higher Education). Brainstorm. Retrieved 2012-05-30. 
	^ a b Honn, Josh. "A Guide to Digital Humanities: Values Methods". Northwestern University Library. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015. Retrieved 19 September 2015. 
	^ Find accessible, brief descriptions of each at A Guide to Digital Humanities archived site.
	^ Bradley, John (2012). "No job for techies: Technical contributions to research in digital humanities". In Marilyn Deegan and Willard McCarty (eds.). Collaborative Research in the Digital Humanities. Farnham and Burlington: Ashgate. pp. 11–26 [14]. ISBN 9781409410683. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
	^ "Grant Opportunities". National Endowment for the Humanities, Office of Digital Humanities Grant Opportunities. Retrieved 25 January 2012. [permanent dead link]
	^ "Harvard University Arts & Humanities Research Computing - Harvard University Arts & Humanities Research Computing". Harvard University Arts & Humanities Research Computing. 
	^ Roth, S. (2014), "Fashionable functions. A Google n-gram view of trends in functional differentiation (1800-2000)", International Journal of Technology and Human Interaction, Band 10, Nr. 2, S. 34-58 (online: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2491422).
	^ Bobley, Brett (December 1, 2008). "Grant Announcement for Humanities High Performance Computing Program". National Endowment for the Humanities. Retrieved May 1, 2012. 
	^ "Awardees of 2009 Digging into Data Challenge". Digging into Data. 2009. Archived from the original on May 17, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2012. 
	^ "NEH Announces Winners of 2011 Digging Into Data Challenge". National Endowment for the Humanities. January 3, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2012. 
	^ Cohen, Patricia (2010-11-16). "Humanities Scholars Embrace Digital Technology". The New York Times. New York. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2012-06-07. 
	^ Williford, Christa; Henry, Charles (June 2012). "Computationally Intensive Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences: A Report on the Experiences of First Respondents to the Digging Into Data Challenge". Council on Library and Information Resources. ISBN 978-1-932326-40-6. 
	^ Dzogang, Fabon; Lansdall-Welfare, Thomas; Team, FindMyPast Newspaper; Cristianini, Nello (2016-11-08). "Discovering Periodic Patterns in Historical News". PLOS ONE. 11 (11): e0165736. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0165736. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 5100883 [image: Freely accessible]. PMID 27824911. 
	^ Seasonal Fluctuations in Collective Mood Revealed by Wikipedia Searches and Twitter Posts F Dzogang, T Lansdall-Welfare, N Cristianini - 2016 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, Workshop on Data Mining in Human Activity Analysis
	^ Flaounas, I.; Turchi, M.; Ali, O.; Fyson, N.; Bie, T. De; Mosdell, N.; Lewis, J.; Cristianini, N. (2010). "The Structure of EU Mediasphere". PLoS ONE. 5 (12): e14243. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0014243. PMC 2999531 [image: Freely accessible]. PMID 21170383. 
	^ Lampos, V; Cristianini, N. "Nowcasting Events from the Social Web with Statistical Learning". ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST). 3 (4): 72. doi:10.1145/2337542.2337557. 
	^ NOAM: news outlets analysis and monitoring system; I Flaounas, O Ali, M Turchi, T Snowsill, F Nicart, T De Bie, N Cristianini Proc. of the 2011 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data
	^ Automatic discovery of patterns in media content, N Cristianini, Combinatorial Pattern Matching, 2-13, 2011
	^ a b Lansdall-Welfare, Thomas; Sudhahar, Saatviga; Thompson, James; Lewis, Justin; Team, FindMyPast Newspaper; Cristianini, Nello (2017-01-09). "Content analysis of 150 years of British periodicals". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences: 201606380. doi:10.1073/pnas.1606380114. ISSN 0027-8424. PMID 28069962. 
	^ Bol, P. K., C.-L. Liu, and H. Wang. (2015) "Mining and discovering biographical information in Difangzhi with a language-model-based approach", Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Digital Humanities. (https://arxiv.org/abs/1504.02148)
	^ Presner, Todd (2010). "Digital Humanities 2.0: A Report on Knowledge". Connexions. Retrieved 2012-06-09. 
	^ Automated analysis of the US presidential elections using Big Data and network analysis; S Sudhahar, GA Veltri, N Cristianini; Big Data & Society 2 (1), 1-28, 2015
	^ Gardiner, Eileen and Ronald G. Musto. (2015). The Digital Humanities: A Primer for Students and Scholars. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 83.
	^ "Welcome // - DiRT Directory". dirtdirectory.org. 
	^ "TAPoR". tapor-test.artsrn.ualberta.ca. 
	^ "Voyant Tools". voyant-tools.org. 
	^ "dhresourcesforprojectbuilding [licensed for non-commercial use only] / Digital Humanities Tools". dhresourcesforprojectbuilding.pbworks.com. 
	^ See CUNY Academic Commons Wiki Archive for more.
	^ "The Walt Whitman Archive". www.whitmanarchive.org. 
	^ "Emily Dickinson, From Fascicle to Open Access | Harvard University Press". www.hup.harvard.edu. Retrieved 2016-12-26. . See Emily Dickinson Archive website
	^ League of Nations archives, United Nations Office in Geneva. Network visualization and analysis published in Grandjean, Martin (2014). "La connaissance est un réseau". Les Cahiers du Numérique. 10 (3): 37–54. doi:10.3166/lcn.10.3.37-54. Retrieved 2014-10-15. 
	^ "Homepage". Slave Societies Digital Archive. 
	^ "People". Department of History. 
	^ "Timeline: 4535 Time Magazine Covers, 1923-2009". 
	^ "A View from Above: Exploratory Visualizations of MoMA Photography Collection". 
	^ "Exploring One Million Manga Pages with Supercomputers and HIPerSpace". 
	^ Manovich, Lev (2017). Instagram and Contemporary Image. 
	^ “Cultural Analytics: Computational Approaches to the Study of Culture,” the University of Chicago, May 2015 and “Cultural Analytics symposium,” Notre Dame University, May 2017.
	^ “Culture Analytics program,” Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics (IPAM), UCLA, March 7–June 10, 2016.
	^ "Journal of Cultural Analytics: CA". 
	^ "Mapping the Republic of Letters". National Endowment for the Humanities. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
	^ Cohen, Patricia (16 December 2010). "In 500 Billion Words, New Window on Culture". New York Times. 
	^ Hayes, Brian (May–June 2011). "Bit Lit". American Scientist. 99 (3): 190. doi:10.1511/2011.90.190. 
	^ Letcher, David W. (April 6, 2011). "Cultoromics: A New Way to See Temporal Changes in the Prevalence of Words and Phrases" (PDF). American Institute of Higher Education 6th International Conference Proceedings. 4 (1): 228. 
	^ a b Michel, Jean-Baptiste; Liberman Aiden, Erez (16 December 2010). "Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books". Science. 331 (6014): 176–82. doi:10.1126/science.1199644. PMC 3279742 [image: Freely accessible]. PMID 21163965. 
	^ "Debates in the Digital Humanities". 
	^ Fish, Stanley (2012-01-09). "The Digital Humanities and the Transcending of Mortality". The New York Times. New York. Retrieved 2012-05-30. 
	^ Leroi, Armand. "Digitizing the Humanities". The New York Times Online. The New York Times. Retrieved 14 May 2016. 
	^ Kirsch, Adam. "Technology Is Taking Over English Departments". The New Republic. The New Republic. Retrieved 14 May 2016. 
	^ Straumshein, Carl. "Digital Humanities Bubble". Inside Higher Education. Retrieved 14 May 2016. 
	^ Straumshein, Carl. "Digital Humanities as 'Corporatist Restructuring'". Inside Higher Education. Inside Higher Education. Retrieved 14 May 2016. 
	^ Carlson, Tracy. "Humanities and business go hand in hand". The Boston Globe. Retrieved 14 May 2016. 
	^ Pannapacker, William. "Stop Calling It 'Digital Humanities'". Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved 14 May 2016. 
	^ Dobson, James E. (2015). "Can an Algorithm be Disturbed? Machine Learning, Intrinsic Criticism, and the Digital Humanities". College Literature. 42 (4): 543–564. 
	^ a b "Johanna Drucker (UCLA) Lecture, "Should Humanists Visualize Knowledge?"". Vimeo. Retrieved 2016-01-25. 
	^ "Debates in the Digital Humanities". 
	^ "Open Thread: The Digital Humanities as a Historical "Refuge" from Race/Class/Gender/Sexuality/Disability?". Archived from the original on 2013-12-03. 
	^ a b "Debates in the Digital Humanities". dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu. 
	^ a b George H. Williams. "Disability, Universal Design, and the Digital Humanities". Debates in the Digital Humanities. 
	^ Liu, Alan. "Where is Cultural Criticism in the Digital Humanities?". UCSB. Retrieved 14 May 2016. 
	^ "'Poetry in Motion'". Nature. Nature. Retrieved 14 May 2016. 
	^ Kirschenbaum, Matthew. "What Is "Digital Humanities," and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible Things about It?" (PDF). Wordpress. Matthew Kirschenbaum. Retrieved 14 May 2016. 
	^ "Guidelines for Evaluating Work in Digital Humanities and Digital..." Modern Language Association. Retrieved 2017-02-13. 
	^ "Guidelines for the Professional Evaluation of Digital Scholarship by Historians | AHA". www.historians.org. Retrieved 2017-02-13. 
	^ "About | ADHO". adho.org. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
	^ Vanhoutte, Edward (2011-04-01). "Editorial". Literary and Linguistic Computing. 26 (1): 3–4. doi:10.1093/llc/fqr002. Retrieved 2011-07-11. 
	^ a b "About HASTAC". HASTAC. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 




Bibliography[edit]


	Beagle, Donald, (2014). Digital Humanities in the Research Commons: Precedents & Prospects, Association of College & Research Libraries: dh+lib.
	Benzon, William; Hays, David (1976). "Computational Linguistics and the Humanist". Computers and the Humanities. 10: 265–274. doi:10.1007/bf02420060. 
	Berry, D. M., ed. (2012). Understanding Digital Humanities, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
	Burdick, Anne, Johanna Drucker, Peter Lunenfeld, Todd Presner, & Jeffrey Schnap (2012). Digital_Humanities, The MIT Press
	Busa, Roberto (1980). ‘The Annals of Humanities Computing: The Index Thomisticus’, in Computers and the Humanities vol. 14, pp. 83–90. Computers and the Humanities (1966-2004)
	Celentano, A., Cortesi, A. & Mastandrea, P. (2004). Informatica Umanistica: una disciplina di confine, Mondo Digitale, vol. 4, pp. 44–55.
	Classen, Christoph, Kinnebrock, Susanne, & Löblich, Maria, eds. (2012). Towards Web History: Sources, Methods, and Challenges in the Digital Age. Historical Social Research, 37 (4), 97-188.
	Condron Frances, Fraser, Michael & Sutherland, Stuart, eds. (2001). Oxford University Computing Services Guide to Digital Resources for the Humanities, West Virginia University Press.
	Fitzpatrick, Kathleen (2011). Planned Obsolescence: Publishing, Technology, and the Future of the Academy. New York; NYU Press. ISBN 9780814727874
	Gardiner, Eileen and Ronald G. Musto. (2015). The Digital Humanities: A Primer for Students and Scholars. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
	Gold, Matthew K., ed. (2012). Debates In the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
	Grandjean, Martin (2016). "A social network analysis of Twitter: Mapping the digital humanities community". Cogent Arts & Humanities. 3 (1): 1171458. doi:10.1080/23311983.2016.1171458. 
	Hancock, B.; Giarlo, M.J. (2001). "Moving to XML: Latin texts XML conversion project at the Center for Electronic Texts in the Humanities". Library Hi Tech. 19 (3): 257–264. doi:10.1108/07378830110405139. 
	Heftberger, Adelheid (2016). Kollision der Kader. Dziga Vertovs Filme, die Visualisierung ihrer Strukturen und die Digital Humanities. Munich: edition text + kritik.
	Hockey, Susan (2001). Electronic Text in the Humanities: Principles and Practice, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
	Honing, Henkjan (2008). "The role of ICT in music research: A bridge too far?". International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing. 1 (1): 67–75. 
	Inman James, Reed, Cheryl, & Sands, Peter, eds. (2003). Electronic Collaboration in the Humanities: Issues and Options, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
	Kenna, Stephanie & Ross, Seamus, eds. (1995). Networking in the humanities: Proceedings of the Second Conference on Scholarship and Technology in the Humanities held at Elvetham Hall, Hampshire, UK 13–16 April 1994. London: Bowker-Saur.
	Kirschenbaum, Matthew (2008). Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
	Manovich, Lev (2013). 'Software Takes Command. London and New York: Bloomsbury Academic.
	McCarty, Willard (2005). Humanities Computing, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
	Moretti, Franco (2007). Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for Literary History. New York: Verso.
	Mullings, Christine, Kenna, Stephanie, Deegan, Marilyn, & Ross, Seamus, eds. (1996). New Technologies for the Humanities London: Bowker-Saur.
	Newell, William H., ed. (1998). Interdisciplinarity: Essays from the Literature. New York: College Entrance Examination Board.
	Ramsay, Steve (2011). Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
	Schreibman, Susan, Siemens, Ray & Unsworth, John, eds. (2004). A Companion To Digital Humanities Blackwell Publishers.
	Selfridge-Field, Eleanor, ed. (1997). Beyond MIDI: The Handbook of Musical Codes. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
	Thaller, Manfred (2012). "Controversies around the Digital Humanities". Historical Social Research. 37 (3): 7–229. [permanent dead link]
	Swirski, Peter. (2013). From Literature to Biterature: Lem, Turing, Darwin, and Explorations in Computer Literature, Philosophy of Mind, and Cultural Evolution, MQUP.
	Tötösy de Zepetnek, Steven (2013). Digital Humanities and the Study of Intermediality in Comparative Cultural Studies. Ed. Steven Tötösy de Zepetnek. West Lafayette: Purdue Scholarly Publishing Services.
	Unsworth, John (2005). Scholarly Primitives: What methods do humanities researchers have in common, and how might our tools reflect this?
	Lansdall-Welfare, T; Sudhahar, S; Thompson, J; Lewis, J; Cristianini, N. "Content analysis of 150 years of British periodicals". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A: 201606380. doi:10.1073/pnas.1606380114. PMID 28069962. .
	Warwick C., Terras, M., & Nyhan, J., eds. (2012). Digital Humanities in Practice, Facet Publishing
	YOSHIDA,Yukihiko,"Leni Riefenstahl and German Expressionism: A Study of Visual Cultural Studies Using Transdisciplinary Semantic Space of Specialized Dictionaries",Technoetic Arts: a journal of speculative research (Editor Roy Ascott),Volume 8, Issue3,intellect,2008




Further reading[edit]

Introductory guides

	Intro to Digital Humanities by UCLA Center for Digital Humanities
	CUNY Digital Humanities Resource Guide by CUNY Digital Humanities Initiative
	DH Toychest: Guides and Introductions curated by DH scholar Alan Liu
	How did they make that? by DH scholar Miriam Posner
	The Digital Humanities: A Primer for Students and Scholars (2015)
	Digital Humanities in Practice (2012)


External links[edit]

	[image: ]	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Digital humanities.


	What is digital humanities? - a critical project highlighting the diversity of DH definitions
	The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations - the main international alliance of DH programs
	CenterNet - Mapping of DH centers



	

	v
	t
	e




Digital Humanities


	

	Computers and writing
	Computational archaeology
	Cybertext
	Cultural analytics
	Digital Classicist
	Digital library
	Digital Medievalist
	Digital history
	Digitizing
	Digital rhetoric
	Digital scholarship
	Electronic literature
	E-research
	Humanistic informatics
	Multimedia literacy
	New media
	Semantic Web
	Systems theory
	Text Encoding Initiative
	Transliteracy










	

	v
	t
	e




Humanities


	

	Anthropology
	Digital Humanities
	History
	Law
	Literature
	Performing arts
	Politics
	Philosophy
	Religious studies
	Visual arts










	Authority control	

	LCCN: sh2008122106
	GND: 1038714850
















[image: ]

					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Digital_humanities&oldid=839783684"					

				Categories: 	Digital humanities


Hidden categories: 	CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter
	All articles with dead external links
	Articles with dead external links from December 2016
	Articles with permanently dead external links
	All Wikipedia articles needing clarification
	Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2017
	Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
	Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers



				

							

		

		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools

							Not logged in
	Talk
	Contributions
	Create account
	Log in


					

									
										
						Namespaces

							Article
	Talk


					

										
												
						
							Variants
						

						
							

						

					

									

				
										
						Views

							Read
	Edit
	View history


					

										
						
						More

						
							

						

					

										
						
							Search
						

						
							
															

						

					

									

			

			
				

						
			Navigation

			
									Main page
	Contents
	Featured content
	Current events
	Random article
	Donate to Wikipedia
	Wikipedia store


							

		

			
			Interaction

			
									Help
	About Wikipedia
	Community portal
	Recent changes
	Contact page


							

		

			
			Tools

			
									What links here
	Related changes
	Upload file
	Special pages
	Permanent link
	Page information
	Wikidata item
	Cite this page


							

		

			
			Print/export

			
									Create a book
	Download as PDF
	Printable version


							

		

			
			In other projects

			
									Wikimedia Commons


							

		

			
			Languages

			
									العربية
	Català
	Cymraeg
	Deutsch
	Español
	Euskara
	Français
	한국어
	Italiano
	עברית
	Latina
	Magyar
	日本語
	Polski
	Русский
	Slovenščina
	Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
	Suomi
	Svenska
	தமிழ்
	ไทย
	Tiếng Việt
	中文


				Edit links
			

		

				

		

				
							 This page was last edited on 5 May 2018, at 17:00.
	Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


							Privacy policy
	About Wikipedia
	Disclaimers
	Contact Wikipedia
	Developers
	Cookie statement
	Mobile view


											
						[image: Wikimedia Foundation]					
	
						[image: Powered by MediaWiki]					


						

		

		
	