
		
	
		
		
			
				
				
			

			Advanced Search

		

	
		
		
			About & Contact
	Browse Subjects
	Catalogs
	eBooks
	News
	Order
	Rights
	Permissions
	
				Cart: [0]			


			Resources for:
	Authors
	Booksellers & Librarians
	Educators
	Journalists
	Readers


	
	
		
			

				Emily Dickinson, From Fascicle to Open Access

				
				“Emily Dickinson (1830–1886) bequeathed to us nearly 1,800 poems; in some passionate years she wrote almost a poem a day. Like all capacious writers, she baffles complete understanding: to enter her poetics entirely a reader would have to know by heart (and by ear) all her poems. Ideally, too, her reader should possess the King James Bible as firmly as she did, and should have read the poetry of the English past as fervently as she had… Yet readers worldwide, even when they have lacked her background, have flocked to her poems, responding to her candor, her grief, and her wit.”—Helen Vendler, Dickinson: Selected Poems and Commentaries

				
				
						[image: Emily Dickinson’s writing table and chair, on display in the Houghton Library’s Dickinson Room]
						Emily Dickinson’s writing table and chair, on display in the Houghton Library’s Dickinson Room.

				

				
				In 1950, Harvard’s Houghton Library received its world-renowned Dickinson Collection as a gift from the poet’s heirs, together with publication rights. Soon thereafter, the well-known literary historian Thomas H. Johnson was chosen as editor, and the three-volume Poems of Emily Dickinson was published by Harvard University Press in 1955. This landmark edition presented, for the first time, transcriptions of all of Dickinson’s known poems, noting variant words and including multiple versions of poems. In 1958, the Press followed up with a three-volume edition of Dickinson’s letters, edited by Johnson and Theodora Ward.

				
				In 1998, R. W. Franklin and the Press published a new three-volume edition containing 1,789 of Dickinson’s poems, the largest number ever assembled. Arranged chronologically based on new dating analysis, The Poems of Emily Dickinson: Variorum Edition transcribed the entire known corpus of approximately 2,500 textual sources, giving as many as seven versions of some poems. In 1999, the Press published Franklin’s The Poems of Emily Dickinson: Reading Edition, which follows the same numbering system as the Variorum but offers, in one volume, a single version of each poem.

				
				In 2016, the Press published Cristanne Miller’s edition of Emily Dickinson’s Poems: As She Preserved Them. This is the only major edition of the complete poems to distinguish in easy visual form the approximately 1,100 poems Dickinson took pains to copy carefully onto folded sheets and gather with string into booklets (fascicles)—arguably to preserve them for posterity—from the poems she kept in rougher form or apparently did not retain. Miller’s Introduction describes Dickinson’s practices in copying and circulating poems and summarizes contentious debates within Dickinson scholarship.

				
				HUP’s long engagement with the works of Emily Dickinson extends to the Emily Dickinson Archive, which makes high-resolution images of manuscripts of Dickinson’s poetry and letters available in open access, along with transcriptions and annotations from historical and scholarly editions. The first release, in Fall 2013, focuses on the corpus of poems that Franklin identified in his Variorum but includes transcriptions by Johnson and other editors who published Dickinson’s poems in collections starting shortly after her death. Under the guidance of General Editor Leslie Morris, with an Advisory Board of distinguished scholars, EDA is a growing collaboration that includes Amherst College, Beinecke Library at Yale University, the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard, Boston Public Library, Digital Public Library of America, Emily Dickinson Lexicon at Brigham Young University, Harvard Library, Harvard University Press, and Houghton Library at Harvard.

				
								
				Key Features of Emily Dickinson Archive

						Find poems easily with multiple index and reference tools
	Study the poet’s own handwriting, variants, and arrangement of her work
	Read and compare editions, word choice, and transcriptions through time
	Engage in new scholarship using tools for creating annotations, transcriptions, and reading lists


				

				
				
					
						
					

				


				
					
						
							[image: Cover: Emily Dickinson’s Poems: As She Preserved Them]
							Emily Dickinson’s Poems: As She Preserved Them

							Edited by Cristanne Miller

						

						
							[image: Cover: Dickinson: Selected Poems and Commentaries]
							Dickinson: Selected Poems and Commentaries

							Helen Vendler

						
							
						
							[image: Cover: The Gardens of Emily Dickinson]
							The Gardens of Emily Dickinson

							Judith Farr

						

						
							[image: Cover: The Poems of Emily Dickinson: Reading Edition]
							The Poems of Emily Dickinson: Reading Edition

							Edited by R. W. Franklin

						

					

				


				
					View additional works by and about Emily Dickinson from Harvard University Press »
				

				
				Back to top

				
			

			
			
								
				
					
					[image: The Digital Loeb Classical Library [logo and text on gray background]]
				

							
				

			

		


				
		
			
				Recent News

				
						
			On Utah Public Radio’s Access Utah, Matthew Bowman, author of Christian: The Politics of a Word in America, discussed the diversity of political traditions embedded in the word (and identity) “Christian.”
	An excerpt from Assa Doron and Robin Jeffrey’s Waste of a Nation: Garbage and Growth in India, on the country’s booming trade in recycled human hair, was published at Inside Story.
	Mehrsa Baradaran, author of The Color of Money, spoke with the history of capitalism podcast Who Makes Cents? about how the popular embrace of “banking Black” distracts from more far-reaching solutions to the racial wealth gap.
	Jennifer Mittelstadt, author of The Rise of the Military Welfare State, wrote at War on the Rocks about the negative response to her book from many military families (who reject the idea that they receive handouts) and on American politicians’ recent—historically speaking—tendency to pit (unworthy) “welfare spending” directly against (worthy) “military spending.”


					

			
				Stay Posted

				
					[image: Cover of current seasonal catalog]Browse our interactive Autumn/Winter 2018 catalog.

					
					Now Available: The digital Loeb Classical Library (loebclassics.com) extends the founding mission of James Loeb with an interconnected, fully searchable, perpetually growing virtual library of all that is important in Greek and Latin literature.


					Find new facing-page translations of classic works from the Dumbarton Oaks Medieval Library, I Tatti Renaissance Library, Loeb Classical Library, and Murty Classical Library of India.


					Booksellers and Librarians: Our recent titles are available via Edelweiss.


					
					
					
Off the Page: Visit our multimedia page for video about recent projects and interviews with HUP authors.

						
					Join Our Mailing List: Subscribe to receive information about forthcoming books, seasonal catalogs, and more, in newsletters tailored to your interests.

					
					
				

				
					
					
					
					
					
					
				

			

			

						
		Blog

			[image: How the Other Half Banks]
	April 26: Is Postal Banking Coming?
	United States Senator for New York Kirsten Gillibrand has just introduced major new legislation to create a Postal Bank, which would establish a retail bank in all of the U.S. Postal Service’s 30,000 locations. As detailed by the Senator’s announcement, the Postal Bank “would effectively end predatory payday lending industry practices overnight by giving low-income Americans, particularly communities of color and rural communities, access to basic banking services that they currently don’t have. The lack of access to traditional banking services makes it nearly impossible for low-income Americans to escape the cycle of poverty because they are often forced to spend large percentages of their income to cash their paychecks or pay back high-interest predatory payday loans.” Mehrsa …


						
				
			

		
				
		
			About & Contact | Awards | Browse | Catalogs | Conference Exhibits | eBooks | Exam Copies | News | Order | Rights | Permissions | Search | Shopping Cart

	
			Resources for: Authors | Booksellers & Librarians | Educators | Journalists | Readers

	
			Harvard University Press offices are located at 79 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA & Vernon House, 23 Sicilian Avenue, London WC1A 2QS UK

	
			© 2018 President and Fellows of Harvard College | Read our Privacy Policy

		

			

