
Skip to Main Content



			

			
		

	Skip to content




	

	
		[x]
		Join MQUP's Mailing List

		

		Sign up for our newsletter about new books in your discipline and exclusive offers.

		
			
			
					


		

		

	








  
	
		

		  			
				
				
					[image: Shopping Cart]
					[image: Checkout]
				

						

			
			

				
				Welcome, Guest
				
				
					[image: Login Lock] Login
					[image: Create Account Icon] Create Account
				

				
				
				[image: Change Currancy]
			
			
				

				
					
				Canadian Store (CAD)
You are currently shopping in our Canadian store. For orders outside of Canada, please switch to our international store. International and US orders are billed in US dollars.

				
					

					[x] No thanks, continue shopping in our Canadian store.

				

				
				

			

		
				
								0 Items		    
			


		

		

	

	
		[image: McGill-Queen’s University Press Logo]

		
			
				
			
						


			

					

		

		

	



	
		
			
						
				
				
					
				
						Home 
						
					
	
						About The Press 
						
					
	
						Browse Books 
						
					
	
						Ordering Info 
						
					
	
						Publishing With Us 
						
					
	
						Permissions 
						
					
	
						Distribution 
						
					
	
						Our Series 
						
					
	
						Awards 
						
					
	
						Blog 
						
					
	
						Events 
						
					
	
						Programme Français 
						
					
	
						Media Inquiries 
						
					
	
						Contact Us 
						
					


		
				

        	
        
    
		
			Stay

			Connected

			

			Looking for more MQUP?
 Sign up for our newsletter about new books and exclusive offers.

			
				
				
						


			

			

		

	
				
					
						
							Course
Adoption »
						

						
						We are pleased to provide examination or desk copies to professors. Click for more information ›


						
					

				

			
			

			
						
				
					back to filtered results

				
					
				[image: From Literature to Biterature]
zoom cover image
	From Literature to Biterature
Lem, Turing, Darwin, and Explorations in Computer Literature, Philosophy of Mind, and Cultural Evolution
By Peter  Swirski
Cultural Studies, Literary Theory & Criticism, Philosophy: Mind & Language

				
					[image: Google Preview]
				

				9780773589926

			



		
				

			
				
					
			

				
				

				
				
        
				
				
					Quantity	
							
						


			
			
			
			
					Price	
							
					
				
					$29.95 CAD 10% off

				

				
			

			
						
		
						$26.96

						



			

			
			
  				
  				
  						 	
  								
  								
  							


  				

  			

					
					
						eBook Available
							Amazon CA
	Google Play
	Kobo CA


					

				
				

			
				
			
					Email
				
					Print
				
					
						Add to Wishlist
					
				
				

			


	Overview
	Reviews
	Author Bio
	Table of Contents
	More by Author...


					
						The ultimate future of literature and literary studies in the age of thinking and evolving machines.

From Literature to Biterature is based on the premise that in the foreseeable future computers will become capable of creating works of literature. Among hundreds of other questions, it considers: Under which conditions would machines become capable of creative writing? Given that computer evolution will exceed the pace of natural evolution a million-fold, what will such a state of affairs entail in terms of art, culture, social life, and even nonhuman rights?

Drawing a map of impending literary, cultural, social, and technological revolutions, Peter Swirski boldly assumes that computers will leap from mere syntax-driven processing to semantically rich understanding. He argues that acknowledging biterature as a species of literature will involve adopting the same range of attitudes to computer authors (computhors) as to human ones and that it will be necessary to approach them as agents with internal states and creative intentions. 

Ranging from the metafiction of Stanislaw Lem to the "Turing test" (familiar to scientists working in Artificial Intelligence and the philosophy of mind) to the evolutionary trends of culture and machines, Swirski's scenarios lay the groundwork for a new area of study on the cusp of literary futurology, evolutionary cognition, and philosophy of the future.


				
					Details

					
						
						252 Pages, 6 x 9

						
						
						ISBN 9780773542952

						October 2013

						
						Formats: Cloth, eBook

					


					
							Recommend to Library
	Ordering eBooks
	Rights and Permissions
	Course Adoption
	Media Inquiries
	Other Ordering Options


					


					

					 
					
						Tweet
					

					


				

				

			
					

					
						"Swirski's work is an accessible introduction to the domain of Artificial Intelligence and its impact on the presumed emergence of computer-generated literature - a thought-provoking concept." Tomasz Lem, author of Adventures in the Field of Universal Gravitation
“From Literature to Biterature is the best thing that’s appeared since Future Shock by Alvin Toffler. At points fascinating, unsettling, and profound, Swirski effortlessly integrates philosophy of mind, robotics, literary studies, cultural trends, futurology, evolution, and many other areas of intellectual analysis. There is no other book like it.” Waclaw M. Osadnik, Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies, University of Alberta
"Once I had a chess-playing computer that was programmed to comment on my moves. The greatest praise it could bestow on one of them was to inquire, 'Are you also a computer?' Is this an omen of our literary future? Will computers one day win not only chess tournaments but Pulitzer Prizes? Will biterature overcome literature? Peter Swirski thinks so, and he also thinks that Turing and Darwin have told us how it can happen. If his book inspires and provokes you as much as it did me, reading it is a move that even my chess computer would complement." Jaakko Hintikka, Department of Philosophy, Boston University 
“Overall, a stimulating, enjoyable read.” Choice
“However beautiful or ugly computer code may be, it is still written by humans. In From Literature to Biterature, Peter Swirski, a professor of American studies and the culture at the University of Missouri-Saint Louis, proposes a new version of the Turing Test: can computers write literature?... it is fascinating to imagine machines that operate on their own creative terms, working outside the scripts humans write for them and beyond the boundaries of what we now recognize as creativity.” Times Literary Supplement
“This latest book confirms [Swirski’s] skill in handling transdisciplinary studies, blending in the proposed route from literature to biterature issues of science, mind philosophy and society.” Leonardo
					

					
						Peter Swirski is professor of American literature and culture at the University of Missouri-Saint Louis and former research director at the Helsinki Collegium for Advanced Studies. He is the author of twelve books, including Ars Americana, Ars Politica: Partisan Expression in Contemporary American Literature and Culture.
					

					
						Lemmata
Narrative Intelligence; Test of Time; Avocados or Wombats; Institute for Advanced Studies; Builtware and Bitware; Paignton Zoo 3

part one

1 Biterature
Toscanelli’s Map; Bloomsday; Titan; Manchester Mark; Manglers and Mashers; Suits for the Dawn Patrol; Charabia; Short for Raconteur; I Gave Myself an Electric Current; Abe’s Saloon!; Humming (to Itself?) 17
2 Computhors
Poetic Licence; Devotchka; Analytical Engine; EZ-Writer; Möbius-Like; JFK; One-Armed Bandit; Homeostat Sapiens; As It Sees Fit; Brainstorm; A1, B2, C3; Black Boxes 35
3 Bibliosophy
La Chanson de Roland; The Motherboard of All Problems; Little Endian; Algo Trading; Father Roberto Busa; Riverside Shakespeare; Death in Holbein; Zettabyte; A Hamlet Every Eight Seconds; A Pill That Makes Me Feel Loved 53
4 Transhumana
Non Serviam; Collective Loss of Morale; Slippery Slope; Artificial Stupidity; Prometheus and Dolus; L’Homme Machine; DARPA; Nobel Prize in Biterature; Chatbots in Chatter 71

part two
5 tt
Supercalifragilistic; Adroit Android; Imitation Game; Parry; Exit Human, Enter Machine; I, Object; I Always Avoid a Kangaroo; Reverse Turing Test; Ultimatest; Aramis 89
6 qed
Troubles with Functionalism; Print This!; Trompe l’Oeil; Like the Pope; A Bevy of Pigeons; No More, No Less; Dicty; Operational Definition?; Flugblogs; On Being Mental 111
7 ToM
Kismet; PaPeRo; Guilty as Charged; Eureka; Meaning; Elementary, Dear Wason; Biology in Action; Driving Range; Insula Cortex; On Being Redundant 130
8 Y2K+
Methuselah; Yes!; An Amphibian with a Stick; Ellipses in This Picture; Software for the Soul; Parallel Paradigm; Erlang and Mira; DelFlies; Eruntics; Cogito Paradox 149

part three
9 How to Make War and Assassinate People
Ice-Pick and Ricin; A Small African Country; Licence to Kill; Solsects, Sunsects, Synsects; Fires at the Sun; Candy, Anyone?; Bacteriology; Safe Investment 171
10 Biologic, or the Philosophy of Error
Axiomatic Givens; Nature’s Greatest Error; Wandering Jew; Critique of Pure Reason; Manna from Heaven; What Is; Rosencrantz and Guildenstern 183
11 Mind Your Business
100,000 Years; You’re Flying Low, Mac; Neuromancer; See Further; The Making of a Fly 197

Notes 205
Bibliography 209
Index 225
					

					
						
					
						
				
					[image: Ars Americana, Ars Politica]
            	

            Ars Americana, Ars Politica
By Peter  Swirski
9780773537668
$27.95 CAD
Paperback


		   		


					

				
					
						
				
					[image: I Sing the Body Politic]
            	

            I Sing the Body Politic
Edited by Peter  Swirski
9780773536333
$24.95 CAD
Paperback


		   		


					

				
					
						
				
					[image: Art and Science of Stanislaw Lem, The]
            	

            The Art and Science of Stanislaw Lem
Edited by Peter  Swirski
9780773530461
$110.00 CAD
Cloth


		   		


					

				
					
						
				
					[image: From Lowbrow to Nobrow]
            	

            From Lowbrow to Nobrow
By Peter  Swirski
9780773529922
$110.00 CAD
Cloth


		   		


					

				
					
						
				
					[image: Between Literature and Science]
            	

            Between Literature and Science
By Peter  Swirski
9780773520431
$110.00 CAD
Cloth


		   		


					

				
						

						

					
					



back to filtered results

				
				
			
				
			
				
 
				
									
 
				
				

			
 
		
			

		
  
	
 

 

	
		
			
				
					McGill-Queen's University Press is a scholarly publisher of books that engage in public debate, current events, politics, contemporary thought, and the arts. »

[image: Follow Us on Facebook] [image: Follow Us on Twitter] [image: Follow Us on Tumblr] [image: Follow Us on Pinterest] [image: Watch Us on YouTube] [image: Follow Us on Instagram]				

				
					
				
					
				
						Home 
						
					
	
						The Press 
						
					
	
						Browse All Titles 
						
					
	
						Ordering 
						
					
	
						Publishing With Us 
						
					
	
						Distribution 
						
					


		
				

							

				
					
				
					
				
						Acknowledgements 
						
					
	
						Authors, Media & Course Adoption Forms 
						
					
	
						News & Events 
						
					
	
						Course Adoption 
						
					
	
						Contact Us 
						
					


		
				

							

				

			

			

		

		
		
			
					© Copyright 2018 McGill Queen University Press. All Rights Reserved. |
				
				
					
						
							Sitemap 				
						
					
							|
						
						
							Legal 				
						
					
							|
						
						
							Website by Orbit 				
						
					
				

							

			

		

	



