






Skip to content


    
        
            
                To register on our site and for the best user experience, please enable Javascript in your browser using these instructions.

            

        

    




Open global navigationCambridge University PressAcademic
	Cambridge University Press
	Academic	Cambridge Core  (Institutional access)
	Books Catalogue (Individuals)


	Cambridge English
	Education
	Bibles
	Digital Products
	About Us	Governance
	Careers
	Rights & Permissions
	Conference Venues
	Contact Us


	Careers
	Contact Us
		United States



	 Cart
	Location selectorSearch toggle
	Menu









Cart

Your Cart

×


You have 0 items in your cart.





Subtotal: 0.0





View cart (0)
Checkout











View cart and checkout
Continue shopping
×





Continue shopping
×

 












 Include historic titles


Search products








 

Register
Sign in


 












Register
Sign in


 


Wishlist








[image: Academic]


Unlocking potential with the best learning and research solutions







	

Subjects


	Anthropology
	Archaeology
	Arts, theatre and culture
	Chemistry
	Classical studies
	Computer science
	Earth and environmental science
	Economics
	Education
	Engineering

	General science
	Geography
	History
	Languages and linguistics
	Law
	Life science
	Literature
	Management
	Mathematics
	Medicine

	Music
	Philosophy
	Physics and astronomy
	Politics and international relations
	Psychology
	Religion
	Sociology
	Statistics and probability
	Social science research methods

	Browse all subjects





	Textbooks
	Reference
	Authors
	News
	Conferences
	Blogs
	Contact Us
	United States



 

 



	Home
	Academic
	General





























Look Inside
[image: The Digital Humanities]

 

The Digital Humanities
A Primer for Students and Scholars


$29.99 (G)
 

	Authors:
	Eileen Gardiner, Italica Press, New York
	Ronald G. Musto, Italica Press, New York


	Date Published: June 2015
	availability: Available 
	format: Paperback
	isbn: 9781107601024




Rate & review 



 






$
29.99
 (G)



Paperback 





Add to cart 
Add to wishlist


Other available formats:
Hardback, eBook 






Looking for an examination copy?


If you are interested in the title for your course we can consider offering an examination copy. To register your interest please contact collegesales@cambridge.org providing details of the course you are teaching. 



 














×





×





[bookmark: contentsTabAnchor]

Description

Product filter button
	

Description


	

Contents


	

Resources


	

Courses


	

About the Authors




	
The Digital Humanities is a comprehensive introduction and practical guide to how humanists use the digital to conduct research, organize materials, analyze, and publish findings. It summarizes the turn toward the digital that is reinventing every aspect of the humanities among scholars, libraries, publishers, administrators, and the public. Beginning with some definitions and a brief historical survey of the humanities, the book examines how humanists work, what they study, and how humanists and their research have been impacted by the digital and how, in turn, they shape it. It surveys digital humanities tools and their functions, the digital humanists' environments, and the outcomes and reception of their work. The book pays particular attention to both theoretical underpinnings and practical considerations for embarking on digital humanities projects. It places the digital humanities firmly within the historical traditions of the humanities and in the contexts of current academic and scholarly life.
	
	 Provides an examination of the digital humanities within the context of the traditional humanities dating from the Renaissance

	 Considers the theoretical and the meta-issues involved in digital humanities research

	 Provides practical information on available tools, humanities centers, an up-to-date bibliography and glossary, and serious consideration of the issues of academic career advantages and disadvantages plus funding and support for humanities and digital humanities research


Read moreReviews & endorsements
"Deep scholarship and lively engagement with a vast range of contemporary innovations animate this concise, reliable, indeed almost indispensable book."

James J. O’Donnell, author of Avatars of the Word
"Here is the rare publication that offers an insider’s deep understanding of the humanities as well as the practitioner’s experience of the digital. A wealth of theoretical and technical information is on offer, including an invaluable compendium of resources for the aspiring researcher. But the book’s crucial insight is that the fundamental issues shaping this arena are cultural, not technological."

Gail Feigenbaum, Getty Research Institute
"This remarkably intelligent and lucid book explains how the emergence of the digital world has created remarkable opportunities for gains in knowledge through the practice of the humanities. This book, providing a useful appendix and glossary, will lead students and scholars alike to think afresh about why they consider knowledge, its sources, and its representation the way they do."

Nicola Courtright, Amherst College

See more reviews
[bookmark: user_reviews]
Customer reviews

Not yet reviewed
Be the first to review




Log in to review 





Review was not posted due to profanity

×





, create a review

(If you're not , sign out) 










Please enter the right captcha value 

Please enter a star rating. 

Your review must be a minimum of 12 words.




How do you rate this item?








 



Reviews must contain at least 12 words about the product.






















×






Product details

	Date Published: June 2015
	format: Paperback
	isbn: 9781107601024
	length: 285 pages


	dimensions: 226 x 150 x 18 mm
	weight: 0.39kg
	contains: 14 b/w illus. 
	availability: Available



	Table of Contents
1. Introduction to the digital humanities
 2. The organization of humanities research
 3. The elements of digital humanities: text and document
 4. The elements of digital humanities: object, artifact, image, sound, space
 5. Digital tools
 6. Digital environments
 7. Publication: pre-release, release, and beyond
 8. The meta-issues of digital humanities 1
 9. Meta-issues 2: copyright and other rights, DRM, open access
 10. The evolving landscape for the digital humanities
 Epilogue: the half-life of wisdom
 Appendix: digital tools.

Look Inside



	 Table of Contents (97 KB)

	 Marketing Excerpt (170 KB)

	 Front Matter (186 KB)

	 Index (304 KB)

	 Copyright Information Page (116 KB)



	Authors
Eileen Gardiner, Italica Press, New York
Eileen Gardiner is co-founder and co-publisher of Italica Press. She has served as director of ACLS Humanities E-Book, executive director of The Medieval Academy of America, and co-editor of Speculum: A Journal of Medieval Studies. She is author of Visions of Heaven and Hell Before Dante, Medieval Visions of Heaven and Hell, The Pilgrim's Way to St Patrick's Purgatory, and Hell-on-Line, a website on the infernal otherworld in various traditions.
Ronald G. Musto, Italica Press, New York
Ronald G. Musto is co-founder and co-publisher of Italica Press. He has served as director of ACLS Humanities E-Book, co-executive director of The Medieval Academy of America, and editor of Speculum: A Journal of Medieval Studies. He has taught at New York University, Duke University, North Carolina and Columbia University, New York, and has held American Academy in Rome, National Endowment for the Humanities and Mellon Foundation fellowships. He has published nine books and various articles, including Apocalypse in Rome and Renaissance Society and Culture (co-edited with John Monfasani).













This title is available for institutional purchase via Cambridge Core


Cambridge Core offers access to academic eBooks from our world-renowned publishing programme. 




 

Related Books


	


[image: Open Access and the Humanities]

Open Access and the Humanities

Contexts, Controversies and the Future







	


[image: The Cambridge Dictionary of Scientists]

The Cambridge Dictionary of Scientists









	


[image: Handbook for Academic Authors]

Handbook for Academic Authors
























Sign In

Please sign in to access your account









Email Address 




Password


Forgotten your password? 




 Remain logged in to website. 
Cancel











Not already registered? Create an account now.

×

 




Sorry, this resource is locked


Please register or sign in to request access. If you are having problems accessing these resources please email
lecturers@cambridge.org


Register
Sign in




Please note that this file is password protected. You will be asked to input your password on the next screen.


» Proceed







You are now leaving the Cambridge University Press website. Your eBook purchase and download will be
completed by our partner www.ebooks.com. Please see the permission section of the www.ebooks.com catalogue
page for details of the print & copy limits on our eBooks.

Continue
×





Continue
×





Continue
×



Remove this title from your notification list?

Cancel
Continue
×































Save 20% off on your next online purchase with Cambridge Alerts

Receive email alerts on new books, offers and news...

Subscribe


 



Find content that relates to you


Find content that relates to you
I am a...
Author
Bookseller
Company
Journalist
Instructor
Librarian
Society






 


Join us online

	
LinkedIn

	
Facebook

	
YouTube

	
Google+

	
Twitter











This site uses cookies to improve your experience.
Read more
Close







	
Accessibility
	
Legal Notices
	
Rights & Permissions
	
MSA Statement
	
Feedback 
	
Media
	
Sitemap
	
	© Cambridge University Press 2018
	back to top










Are you sure you want to delete your account?

This cannot be undone.


Cancel
 







Thank you for your feedback which will help us improve our service.

If you requested a response, we will make sure to get back to you shortly.

×




Please fill in the required fields in your feedback submission.


×





























