
  
    Home 
   |
    About the Archive 
   |
    Exhibits & Objects 
   |
    Search Engine 
   |
    Bibliography 
   |
    NINES 
   |
  

  
   The Complete Writings and Pictures of

   Dante Gabriel Rossetti

   A Hypermedia Archive

   T
    HE Rossetti Archive facilitates the scholarly study of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, the painter, designer, writer, and translator who was, according to both John Ruskin and Walter Pater, the most important and original artistic force in the second half of the nineteenth century in Great Britain.   In Whistler's famous comment, “He was a king”.

   Completed in 2008 to the plan laid out in 1993, the Archive provides students and scholars with access to all of DGR's pictorial and textual works and to a large contextual corpus of materials, most drawn from the period when DGR's work first appeared and established its reputation (approximately 1848-1920), but some stretching back to the 14th-century sources of his Italian translations. All documents are encoded for structured search and analysis. The Rossetti Archive aims to include high-quality digital images of every surviving documentary state of DGR's works: all the manuscripts, proofs, and original editions, as well as the drawings, paintings, and designs of various kinds, including his collaborative photographic and craft works. These primary materials are transacted with a substantial body of editorial commentary, notes, and glosses.

   Recent additions to the Rossetti Archive are discussed here.

   
   
  
			
			

 






			
		


   
   
    	
       
        [image: Get Firefox!]
       
       

       
       
        [image: Creative Commons License]
       
       
       
      	The Complete Writings and Pictures of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, edited by Jerome J. McGann, is freely distributed by IATH
       and the NINES
       consortium under a Creative Commons License. Supported web browsers include Mozilla
       Firefox and Mac Safari.


   


   

	o uommibatto

