Speech of Rev. W.L. Breckinridge : delivered in the First Presbyterian Church, on Tuesday evening, June 1, in vindication of his principles and conduct against the aspersions of the Rev. Mr. Taylor, uttered in the Unitarian Church, on Sabbath morning, May 29, 1841. / Breckinridge, W. L. (William Lewis) (Louisville [Ky. : s.n.], 1841.) SPEECH OF REV. W. L. BRECKINRIDGE, DELIVERED IN THE FIRST PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, ON TUESDAY EVENING, JUNE 1, In vindication of his principles and conduct against the aspersions of the REV. MR. TAYLOR, UTTERED IN THE UNITARIAN CHURCH, ON SABBATH MORNING, MAY 29, 1841. LOUISVILLE: 1841. To all intelligent and candid persons of every religious persua- sion, into whose hands this speech may fall, it is respectfully dedicated, by the author, with the confident expectation that they till. do him justice-which is all he asks. He is assured that TRUTH IS OMNIPOTENT, AND PUBLIC JUSTICE CERTAIN. The following notice appeared in the morning papers of June 1, 1841. K0aTo THE PUBLTc.-The undersigned having been informed that representations were made in the Unitarian Church, on the last Sabbath morning, by Rev. Mr. Taylor, of such a nature as to demand notice from him, takes this method of re- questing his fellow citizens to suspend their judgment till they hear him; and to this end very respectfully invites them to meet in the First Presbyterian Church, this evening, at 8 o'clock. W. L. BRECKINBIDGE. However unpleasant the occurrences of the last few days, which have occasioned this assembly, I deem myself compen- sated for all by the deep conviction that I have done right. The testimony of a good conscience is far better than the applause of men. Nor can their frowns, nor even their bitterest curses. be set by an honest mind, against the smile of God. I should be uncandid, if I failed to say that I find an addi- tional mitigation of all that is painful in these circumstances, and therefore, an abundant compensation, in this, that however you may view it, I am conscious that I stand before you in de- fence of liberty. It is an honor which God puts upon a man, when he forces him to defend just principles and great interests; and I hail it as such to-night-the due expression of which I am not afraid that the people will always withhold-that I appear before this vast, intelligent, and most respectable assembly, to plead for liberty. I deem myself to have been arraigned at the public bar, by an attack, not only unprovoked, needlessly wounding my feel- ings, and unjustly assailing my character-not only violating the sanctity of my personal rights, as a citizen, a christian, and a minister of the gospel-but in fact, assailing the rights of all, invading public liberty, insidiously violating the best liberty, without which there can be none, liberty of conscience! Every one has a right, as to his fellow-men, to be in reli- gion, what he pleases; and he from whom this right is with- held, whether by ignorance, delusion, prejudice, or oppression, is the most abject and degraded of slaves. God forbid that I, a Kentuckian, nay I bear a prouder name, an American and a Freeman, whose veins are swelling with mingled currents of English, Scotch and Irish blood-boasting yet an higher dis- tinction, in claiming to be an Evangelical, Protestant Chris- tian-God forbid that I should attempt to rob any human crea- ture of this right. I must first abandon my principles and bury all my hopes. It is every one's ample and innlienahle right, as to other men, to be just what he pleases in religion- Pagan, Turk, Atheist, Universalist, Unitarian, any thing lie pleases. But none may compel me to countenance his errors -give my sanction to the usages of his false religion, and thus 4 connive at, nay encouJage and foster his sins. Such an attempt is going rather too far. My conscience objects-iny liberty re- sists-for God's word says, and my reason assents to it, "Who- soever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son. If there come any unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: for he that biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds."-2 John, 9-11. The attack upon my feelings, principles, conduct, and good name, which constitute about all I have-except, thank God, an incomparable wife, promising children, steadyfriends, and immortal hopes-this assault, I shall not characterize in words, in the absence of my assailant. If you say, when all is told, that it was dastardly, malignant, and false, my adversary must blame himself and the truth, not me. This attack was made principally on the last Sabbath morn- ing, by the Rev. Mr. Taylor, in the Unitarian Church of this city-of course in my absence-and without any notice having been given me of his intention to make it. And when last evening in the other church, by the kind permission of the Pas- tor previously obtained, I gave in his presence public notice of my purpose to-night, he informed the assembly that he was no warrior, he could not reply to anything I might say, he had no time for such contests, having better things to do. Truly he may well say that he is no warrior. I do not wonder that he deprecates that distinction. Such demeanor is not honorable warfare. He may be a sailor, but he is not a gallant tar-he is no soldier-and brave stomachs must spew him out. He at- tacked me without cause--for no more than a respectful ex- pression to him of my conscientious views of christian doc- trine and duties. He attacked me without notice-in a place where men's minds were hostile to my religious opinions, if not to my person-at least, where every prejudice was alive against me and my principles. He attacked me behind my back-and when I confronted him, he turned his own. I am ashamed to strike a coward-and shall, therefore, speak as midly upon this whole subject as the nature of the case will permit. I shall shew you presently, too, that the charge, which he re- peated last evening, of inhospitable and insulting treatmient of him, as a stranger, on my part, is utterly unfounded, having not the most distant shadow of truth, in the sense intended by him, and so far as I can learn, understood by the community-but of that in its proper place, The history of my knowledge of Mr. Taylor, and of my in- 5 tercourse with him, is briefly this. According to my present recollection, I had never heard of him uulil l tely. This may reflect some discredit on the extent of my knowledge, but so it is. I had heard of him only in general terms-that he was a converted sailor-now a preacher to seanien-a man of rare abilities-of great devotion to this particular enterprize-a Methodist minister. All this won my heart in advance. bin corpora etc handout.txt harvest lib log named-entities part-of-speech tmp topics unitarian Be- yond this I had not heard anything very particularly of his views and relations. I had the impression, however, (I know not how gotten, for my acquaintance with Boston, and with Bethel operations at large has not been as intimate as I would be hap- py to have it) that he was sustained by the Seamen's Friend So- ciety-an Institution supported by sound Christians. With such information of Mr. T., I was truly gratified when I heard that he had been invited to this city by the Board of Managers of the Bethel Union here-which by the way, it now appears, that he never was. No doubt, as he told me, he supposed that he was when lie came, and I supposed so too-but it seems that he was not. See Appendix A. When I was informed of his arrival a few days ago, I was as truly gratified, and took the very earliest steps in my power to have him invited to occupy our pulpit on last Sabbath night, and take up a collection for the Bethel. On Thursday morning I called to see him, and then to my astonishment and mortification learned from himself what he was in religion. I say from himself-frorn his own lips. I went to no one else to enquire about him. I was entertaining no suspicion of him-my prepossessions were very strong in his favor. I took him by the hand with the utmost cordiality. In our conversation he informed me that his conuection with the Methodist Church was rather nominal than otherwise-that he went to the Conference annually-reported himself-was sub- Ject to its authority during its sessions-was assigned to his la- bors for a year-and then had no more to do with the Confer- ence, and no farther responsibility to it till the next year. A Methodist, that is to say, in his connections, and responsi- bilities, according to his own account of the matter, for some five, six, or ten days annually! H-e informed me farther-in reply to my enquiries, become -of course more numerous and interesting to myself, as a new state of facts was opening before me-that he was not sus- SI believe my first expression after being introduced to hin and havingwelcomed him among us, was an affectionate-fiuniliar cnquiry, "Is this Father Taylor?"- surprised at his youthful appearance, having heard of him under that patriarchal appellation. 6 tained in his labors in Boston, by Mothodists, nor by the Ortho- dox, (I understood him to mean Evangelical Congregationalists) nor in short, as I iinderstood him, by any body, but UuJai'as: that his pulpit had no doors, and was open to all, who called themselvus Christians and had fair standing among their own sort, except those whom he called, U.trA--UniversaYists, under- stood by nw, and upon enquiry explained by him to mean, thoso who hold to no future punishment of any kind or dura- tion, distinguished therefore by him, from such as he termed Restorationist Univorsalists: that his views of Christian doc- trines, duties, and fellowship, were such that he cauktd reuse Christian intercourse to none who professed to hold the Bible, if they were orderly in their behaviour-and ministerial inter- course to nlone of like description who -peached tbe gospel ol Christ. I asked if he would consider one to preach the gospel of Christ, who kept back in his preaching what were commonly called Trialtariatn doctrines. Re said he would! I asked if he would consider one to preach the gospel of Christ, who positive- ly preached what are commonly called Uniitarian doctrines. 11.H said ia wouLDn I told him that I was inexpressibly pained and astonished to hear that such were his views and habit's that, it seemed to me, to have Christian fellowship with one holding such views and practising on thom habitually at home, would be to sanction them here: that having now come to the knowledge of his reli- gious character and views, I did not'see how I could have any ministerial intercourse with him without being understood by the public to give my sanction to them: that I could, of course, commit no one else, but my impression was, that if his position at home had been understood here, the Board of Róanagema of the Bethel Union would never have invited him to visit this city*-and that the friends of the Bethel Union would not now desire his labors, if his position, views, religious character and principles were understood by them. I aver before this great assembly, and what is far more, before God, that this was said with all kindness, and with as much respect as my mind could entertain for one who held his principles. Having made known to him very candidly my first and very strong impres- sion, as to my duty with reference to his, occupancy of my pul- pit under these circumstances, I added that before I finally de- cided on my course, I would confer with such of the RniUng ElA ders of the church, and such Managers of the Bethel belonging SMy ijmpresion was, it must be remembered, at the time of this interview, but corrected that afternoon, that Mr. Taylor had been officially invited by the Board. TO THE CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF MANAGERS OF THE LOUISVILLE BETHEL UNION.7 to our congregation, as I might be able to find-and parted from him with apparent kindness on his part, and certainly no feeling of another sort on mine, making to him as I left him a sincere and cordial tender of such hospitalities, as my poor house could afford. Having met, and fully conferred with four persons, being two of each of the classes referred to above-and being fully, I believe-certainly substantially-sustained by them in all my views of the matter, and these gentlemen concurr- ing with me in the opinion that courtesy required me to see Mr. Taylor in person, and communicate to him, as respectfully as possible, our sense of the necessity of withdrawing the invita- tion, which had been given him, I called on him for that pur- pose. Instead, however, of being received by him, in a respect- ful manner, I deemed myself insulted by him. I felt of course, that it must be very unpleasant for him to receive, as it certainly Was for me to make, such a communication-and I pocketed the insult-a thing that I am not in the habit of doing. I as- sured him that I meant it for politeness, and that if it were not really so, the error was in my sense of good manners, and not in my purpose. He appeared to be mollified by this special es- fort to convince him that no offence, but the reverse was design- ed, and that I was acting under a conscientious view of my public duty. I then left him, saying that I would address a note to the Board of Managers of the Bethel Union on the subject- his own suggestion of the propriety of that course concurring with my previous determination. After his address that night in the 4th street church, and the withdrawal of the assembly, the Board of Managers had a meeting, when that note was read, as follows: TO THE CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF MANAGERS OF THE LOUISVILLE BETHEL UNION. Smi.-It is with unaffected pain and regret that I deem myself obliged to make the following communication. You are aware that I had desired the ministerial labors of the Rev. Mr. Taylor, for the congregation which I serve, during some portion of his visit to this city, and that I had designed availing myself of such an occasion to take up a collection for the support of the Bethel enterprize here. Your Board, in whose hands Mr. Taylor had, with great pro- priety, placed himself while here, was kind enough, at my request, to assign him to us for next Sabbath evening. I am now constrained, very respectfully, to decline the arrangement which I had sought; and candor, no less than respect for your Board, and my concern for the interests involved, require me to state the reason. In a conversation somewhat full, with Mr. Taylor this morning, the first time that circumstances permitted me the pleasure of see- ing him, I heard, with equal pain and surprise, fully expressed to him at the moment, that his views of christian doctrines-his relations at Boston, and his habits of ministerial intercourse, are such that as I suppose, to avail ourselves of his labors, howvevr valuable in many respects they may be, would require, hereafter, ifl consistency were observed, such concessions on tile part of the evaiogelical fri'inds of thle Betlll in this city, as in my judg- ment, would be thtal to that enterprise. Mr. Taylor informed me that he was sustained at home (I understood him wholly) by the Unitarian Churches- that his personal connection with the Methodist Episcopal Church, was rather nonninal than otherwise-that his views of christian doctrines and duties, required him to fraternize and exchange ministerial labors with Unitarian and Universalist clergymen. It seemed to me, that under the circumstaoces of the present case, for me to open my pulpit to Mr. Taylor, would be to sanc- tion his views and habits upon those subjects-and that I could not, thereafter, without inconsistency, object to the introduction into the Bethel pulpit in this city, of clergymen of the Unitarian, Universalist, and other kindred bodies. As a Trinitarian, from deep nnd clear convitcion, I cannot willingly place myself in such an attitude. While, therefore, I have no right, as I have no desire to dictate others, I feel it necessary to request, that the application lately made to your Board, and so kindly granted, may be considered as withdrawn. The congregation to which I minister, will on another occasion, and in our own way, take up subscriptions fur the Bethel, in which we feel a prfonnd and undiminished interest-an interest which I am sure, will not easily abate; althoirgh it is but candid to say, that if at any time, the competent authority should open its pulpit for the instructions of clergymen who deny what the body of my christian brethren, correctly, as I think, interpreting the word of God, hold to be fundamental doctrines of the gospel of our Divine Lord, and this should become the settled policy of the Association, I should feel myself bound to exert what influence I possess to induce my congregation to with, hold its support. I beg you to be assured of my respect for your Board, and of my sincere disavowal of any desire to wound the feelings of Mr. Taylor, or of those gentlemen at whose request he visited the West. I trust that no offence will be taken by any one, as I am only discharging what seems to me a duty as imperious as it is painful. I am. &amp;c. Louisville, May 27, 1841. It should have been stated that Mr. Taylor, in an early part of his address to the citizens on Thursday evening, had said that it had been intimated to him from a.very respectable source, that if his position, views, &amp;c., had been understood, he would probably not have been invited to come here, and that if they were now understood, his continued labors might not be deemed desirable: that he was here at personal inconvenience, and while he wished to do us all the good he could, he wished to do us no harm: if, therefore, his labors were undesirable on any account, he would gladly "make his bow" in the morning, and return to his important labors at home. He closed his ad- dress with the same strain of remark. When my note was read to the Board of Managers, assembled immediately after his ad- dress closed, and the congregation had retired, he made great exceptions in some remarks before the Board. In the observa- 9 tions, which I made in reply, intended to be perfectly respect- ful, but firmly to take the ground which I believed to be proper, and therefore tenable, I alluded with much caution, as I sup- posed, and with all due modesty to what Mr. Taylor had insist- ed upon and reiterated in his discourse just delivered, to wit, his willingness and desire to return home at once, provided evil instead of good were likely to result from his labors here. Was I, or was I not, bound to believe him sincere? I said that I had seen enough to assure me that a continuance of his labors would divide and distract the friends of the Bethel in this city -and that I much feared the issue would be the ruin of that en- terprize, which was too interesting and important to be lightly sacrificed: that he would, therefore, in my humble opinion, best consult his own honor, and the permanency and true interests of the Bethel cause here, by doing what he had said would be very convenient and highly pleasing for him to do. It soon ap- peared that I was utterly wrong in ascribing candor to Mr. Tay- lor: he replied with much asperity that this was equivalent to ordering him out of the town, &amp;c. I rejoined that nothing was farther from my intention: I claimed no right to order any body away: I knew and respected his rights as a freeman as fully as my own; and that I meant only respectfully to say that in my opinion, the course which he had twice publicly declared would be highly agreeable to him would be the most honorable and useful. And now was I right? I protested, a.t the time, that I meant no indignity: and I protest so now; and no just, unprejudiced mind will do me the wrong of doubting my candor. Then, in fact, was I right? Mr. Taylor's heart, he tells us, is in the Beth- el cause. He lives for it-he has long labored in it-he is willing to die for it. Now would he be more truly glorious, leaving.it in peace, as he found it, or by what he has brought on endangering its very existence? Is it the glory of a man to stir up strife? Is it the real glory of a man to consult his own gratification-to indulge his own pride, vanity, ambition, even any of his better sentiments, at the expense of a noble cause with which he has linked his name? I confess I know not what is true honor if this be so. And had I no cause to say that the course which he had himself suggested would be the most use- ful to the Bethel? Time alone can disclose the issues of events. But who thinks this commotion good for the Bethel? And yet I do not say that Mr. Taylor was bound to go away. But I do say that I was justifiable in expressing as I did, the convictions of my own mind on the subject, especially under its peculiar B 10 circumstances.* Now I have been informed that Mr. Taylor stated in the Unitarian Church that some one in this city, under stood by his audience to be myself, had wrillen him a notet requesting hiin to leave the city. It has cone to me without any search on my part through some four or five d ifl'erent chan nels, all respectable and independent of each other, that he was understood to make such an allusion to me, and such a state- ment about me. Now 1 declare that I never addressed a line to him on any subject-and you have seen that the note which I did address to the 1Board contains nothing whatever on that sub- ject. The whole affair occurred precisely as I have related it. And yet Mr. Taylor, will an ingenuity and promptitude worthy of a better use, attempted, and with unique consistency has all along attempl.ed, to discredit me by the charge of arrogant rude- ness to a, stranger. It has been made a serious accusation against me. Now, when you express an opinion that great harm will result from certain things, are you ordering the peo- ple who practice them out of the city? I understand that there are many gentlemen from distant places now in this city pursu- ing the sports of the turf daily in the vicinity. Many of you think that these sports are dangerous and hurtful to those who *It is proper for me here to say, what escaped me in the delivery of Ihe speech, that at the close or the meeting of hle Roiarl on that cvning, andi ra the persona present were retiring from the house, Mr. 'JTIylir approached me with a manner of Iindne.ssI, and taking and holding my liand with apnront cnl rdility, said to me in ubstaihslce, if not in words, "Here our wnr ( n !-.:.'" S lo;ri,-ing hiim to allude to the general question which had been spokenI of in the Bonrd at ilh; imeling juit held of the admis-ion irlto the Bothcl pllpit of Unitarian mini.ter., for the settlement of which the Board lhad adjourned to Ihe next afternoon-and understanding him to mean thit it would be promplly ,hetled when the Board shon Id meet, by admitting such muitisters, I replied, "No, Sir, it just begins herc-the quiestion lnimsbe metand fully discussed." He then made some crenark which h-owed llat I mistook his meaning, which had reference to war between him and myself personally. I instant- ly s:.iJd--"here has been no war between us, Pecept what you hbve eemed disposed to wage against me. I have fell no anger agaiinst yon in the matter." After some other brief exipressions on both sides, not now recollected, baut meant on my partlo be friendly and received from hlia as meant in the ainie spirit-we parted. I thought to nmyelf, why, he minth be a generous old sailor after all-excitable-violent-but kindly too, and ready to forget and lorgive-arnd so I snplposed tlhat 1 sholir not be painsed with having given him serious offence-but that appreciating my mntives and approvinq my adherence to my principles, he had dropped all unkindne:ss in a frank and manly spirit. I heard no more particnlarly of Mr. Tavlor until the ensuing Monday morning, when I was informed of his violent attack upon me in the Unita- rian Church the day before. What wrought the change, it is not for me to say. t 'ihere is somethiung rather queer about this. Since the deliveiv ot this speech two very lespectable gentlemen, friendly to Mr. Taylor, who heard him, have de- clared to me that he said no slch thing as is here ascribed to him about a note or letter-while the number of the channels, e:ually respectable, and perfectly inde- pendant of each other, through which assurances of the most, positive kind have come to me that he did ni:die thin statement, has now swelled to a rliuch larger amount than stated in the speech. It is a small mailer as to the letter, however, comparatively, and susceptible of innocent mistake,and it is certain that both'tbera and in other places, he has stated that I had desired him to depart the town. So l have done him no injustice. practice them, and beyond all doubt and to a great extent inju- rious to this city in their influence upon it-and these opinions you do not hesitate to express upon proper occasions. But are you to be understood by such expression to order all these per- sons out of the city? There are many coffee-houses as we call them kept here, which many of you believe to be exceedingly injurious in their tendency and influence--and you do not hesi- tate to say so. Now do you mean by this to order the people who keep them out of the city? There are many, no doubt, in this house to-night, who think that my course towards Mr. Tay- lor is improper and hurtful, and some of you have had no hesi- fation in saying so, and that in very different terms and spirit, from those employed by me when I said this thing. Now are all such to be understood by me, and the public as ordering me out of the city? And suppose you are-who cares? Do I? Do I care? Why, yes-there is a sense in which I would care. Because, for many reasons, I desire the esteem and confidence of you all. But there is another sense in which I care not-in which I would trample such orders under my feet as baser than the dirt. It is as much aMY cITr as any other man's. 1 possess but little of its goods, but there is a clear sense in which it is as much my city, as it is the richest man's in it. And so Mr. Tay- lor knows, or else his bosom does not hold a freeman's heart, that it is as much his city as mine. (And here I might have said in the speech and I will say in this parenthesis-suppose that I had gone to Boston and that Mr. Taylor had really done far more and worse things to me than he has ever charged that I have done to him, would I have gone around to such churches as I might be permitted to occupy, and under the guise of preach- ing the gospel or promoting some benevolent institution, abused and slandered Mr. Taylor, and compliined and whimpered of his ill treatment, until under such false and mean spirited, pre- tences, I had gotten the good people of Boston by the ears- what would you have said to me when I came back? I believe you would almost have ordered me out of the city. You would have said that I was a base and falso representative of you and your manly spirit, in the old cradle of Liberty. You would re- quire me to respect myself, andr to Icicnemer that I went from you, tho' every ran in Boston were 1o insult me. And you would have shewn ime no :ounllea:nnece i my conduct had been like his.) Then why all ihis ado? \Why this studied, persevering undignified, seli-deeidliiig effort to excite a popular clamor' against me! Why does he attempt to discredit me by these tin- worthy appeals to your generous 'sympathics for a saianrer, and fbuse your displcasure ngduins! nip, for that, whiHih wis as !hr 12 from my design and which is as foreign from my nature, as it can be from yours? No! No! If he were a MAN, worthy the name of a Christian Minister. or an American Citizen, he had never stooped to such dishonor! Tar, he claims to be-one of the "blue-jacket boys." I think he's a double Tar,---Tartar, dastardly at that!* But it is said that Mr. Taylor is a Methodist minister, in good standing with that ehurch-so received by his Brethren here, and so ought to be received by all Christians. Certainly, his standing with them, who are cordially embraced by me as Christian Brethren, is prima facie evidence in his fa- vor. But it is not conclusive. And when an objection comes against him, we must look behind all that. Am I bound to recognize as a Christian brother, as a sober and honest man, every professed Methodist in this city? Am I bound to invite to my pulpit every Methodist, or every Presbyterian minister who may come along? There was a time when to be a Roman citizen was to be a freeman everywhere. I know not but to be an American citizen now is to carry a passport round the globe. But can a man do nothing to forfeit his personal claims to re- spect before he loses his citizenship! It is rather too summary a method of whitewashing character to demand that standing in one church, and that but nominal standing in the present case, should bar all enquiry. Mr. Tay- lor's own account of himself, apart from his use of the term, convinced me that he is but a nominal Methodist. Now if those Brethren choose to have nominal members not bound, by their avowed principles, and settled and published standards of doctrines: very well. But Christian liberty and faithfulness require me to form my estimate of the man as he is-not as their connivance at his irregularity or dishonesty may intimate that he is. Nor does it meet the case fur Mr. Taylor to asseve- *I freely confess myself to be heartily ashamed of these words-not that they do not contain the very trIut, and trulh, the proper utterance of which was jistilied, nav, tcmanded by the circeumiiancae-blt because they are in miserably bad taste, njl fahll very far "below the dignity of the disrussion." I would gladly expunge them--but they were uttered by me as they stand here-and I deem it proper to print the speech, as nearly as possile as it was delivered. I can offer no apology for their use, except the extremity of the provocation, and that, although I endeavored to use all possible caution, even in lte selection of my words, the time was too short to weigh them with sufficient deliberation. I think nny one would find it hard to measure his terms in such a case. 1 say, too, that however much Iregret this in- stance of impetuosity, nand however gladly I would recall the words, neither my as- sailant nor his defenders can justly object to the linguage used in reply to hin, who had charged me with bigotry, intolerance, narrow-mindedness, and insulting arrogance towards a stranger. He is leported to have said, speaking of the bigot-and undet- stood to have levelled it at rne-"he is moved by no kindly sympathies, he sees not, he feels not, his skin is thicker than that of the Leviathan, and the tendereet fibre of his heart is cast iron." Whoso cannot forgive my language, let him put himself in my place, and I am willing to abide his judgment, without one word of murmur. 13 Tate and protest that lie is a sound and consistent Methodist, when so much of his conduct contradicts him. Actions, I have heard ever since I was born, speak louder than words. The way to estimate a man is not merely by what le says-but also by what he does. Now, to whom is the influence o'f Mr. Taylor given at this time in this city? To Methodists, or to Unitarians? His name, which has grown very great-his talents, which are certainly considerable-his power to move the public mind, his aspersions of me, his perversions of truth----to whose aggrandise- ment do they all tend, and whom do they encourage and gratify most highly? To whom, if not to Unitarians, will his victory inure if he should gain one? Was it to advance Methodism, or "liberal Christianity," that lie went into the Unitarian Church and defamed me? I charge upon this gentleman, then that he is no Methodist-and I say it is not right to impose himself on men as one. I charge that he is a piratical vessel sailing under false colors. And 1 think that when such an one ventures out upon the high seas, and still more, when he runs into an unsuspecting and peaceful port, any one who can detect his character, has a right to capture him. The consent, the policy, the necessity of nations require every vessel to sail un- der its true flag-and whoso sails under a false one becomes a public enemy. If Mr. Taylor choose to adopt a flag of his own, and to become, as a good and brave, but rather injudicious gen- tleman, who wished to be a looker-on merely at the battle of Guilford, declared that he was, to wit, a Neutral and Independ- ent Power-be it so. As far as we are concerned he has a right to be so-but then don't let him say he's a Methodist- Oh no! But this gentleman insists that he is a Methodist minister of good and ancient standing. If so, you, every body, I, have a right to expect that he will carry out the Methodist principles in his conduct, as they are announced in their Book of Disci- pline. Let us bring him to this test. He cannot object- for these are his principles-if he be a Methodist minister-de- clared to the world, as solemnly adopted by him. The book in my hand is "The Doctrines and Discipline of the Methodist Episcopal Church." The edition, I believe, in common use here, authorized by the Bishops, and published by the regularly appointed Agents of the Church. On page 8, I read. "ARTICLES OF RELIGION." Of Faith in the Holy Trinity. There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body or parts, of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness; the maker and preser- ver of all things, visible and invisible. And in unity of this Godhead, there are three persons of one substance, power, and 14 eternity;-the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. bin corpora etc handout.txt harvest lib log named-entities part-of-speech tmp topics unitarian bin corpora etc handout.txt harvest lib log named-entities part-of-speech tmp topics unitarian IX. OF THE JUSTIFICATION OF MAN. We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and Sa- viour Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own works or deserv- ings:-Wherefore, that we are justified by faith only, is a most wholesome doctrine, and very full of comfort." I read again on page 134 which is in chapter 4-"THE FORM AND MANNER OF MAKING AND OnDAINING BisuOPS, ELDERS AND DEACONS." S'ec. 2d, "The form and manner of Ordaining Elders." Among other questions, the Bishop asks of the candidate the following: "Will you be ready with all faithful diligence to banish and drive away all erroneous and strange doctrines con- trary to God's word? Answer. I WILL, THE LORD BEING MY HELPER." Such are some of the doctrines held by the Methodist Church. They are rules for none but Methodist----but for them and espe- cially for Methodist ministers, they are obligatory and indispen- sable. For the Church to connive at their violation by her ministry, while they remain her doctrines would be not only wrong----but if general, destructive and suicidal-----and whoso says that he is a Methodist minister, and holds them not, is not an honest man. Such too are the especial, grave and solemn vows which this gentleman has taken, if he be a Meshodist clergyman ordained to administer the ordinances. Behold how he fulfils them! You have seen what the doctrines are-which at his ordination he said he held-these are doctrines indispensable to the system-their opposites, to a Methodist, are false-nay, ruinous; they must not be taught, lest they destroy, instead of saving men. Such, all such, all false doctrines, contrary to God's word, he has in the most solemn manner promised that he will with all faithful diligence banish and drive away-not by force, certainly, except the force of reason and truth-not by violence-but by example and pre- cept-by combatting them in all proper ways, and utterly re- fusing to countenance and sanction them-and religiously speaking those who propagate them. Is not this the plain, rea- sonable, necessary sense of the vows which he has assumed? Behold, then, how he acquits himself of this great responsibil- ity! His intimate connections at home, his religious associa- tions, his constant intercourse, are with UNITARiANs, who deny truths which the system, claimed by him to be his, lays down 15 as fundamental and necessary to salvation! Nor does lie hesi- tate in like manner to countenance erronists of all grades-one single class excepted, Ultra-Universalists, as he calls them. But how is honesty maintained, while, being a Methodist, he countenances others in preaching doctrines which he has de- clared, and being a Methodist, is every day by his profession declaring, to be at war with such as are vital to the system not only of Methodism, but of Christianity! The Methodist standards of Christian doctrine, announce as the true explanation of the Bible, a method of salvation-the way of being saved. Unitarianism and Universalists teach other and different methods, while they deny positively points of the Methodist system which are fundamental. I say he is sail, ing under false colors! He reminds one too forcibly to pass it over, of the scripture which says, "And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, we will eal our own bread, and wear our own apparel only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach." Isa. iv. 1. Now was I bound to receive, nay could I with a good con- science, with honor, with fidelity to men, at large, and especial- ly to my own congregation, receive this gentleman into my confidence and open to him my pulpit? I had cordially invited him, while ignorant of his character; but when I learned it, was I not bound in candor, in honor as a gentlernan, in all fidelity as a christian minister, to tell him that I had been wholly mis- taken in him-and that I must decline a fellowship which I had ignorantly sought? Would any other course have been candid -honest-manly? If I had opened my pulpit to him, and thus as to all essentials, endorsed his character, when all the while I had my doubts about him, nay could not confide in him, and yet not told him so, had this been honest, polite, manly or christian? I thank God I have not so read my Bible. I have no such ways about me. I never sucked such principles from my mother's breast. She would disown me this day if she knew 1 held them. I can't bring her gray hairs down with sorrow to the grave. I don't mean, God helping, me to dishonor my name, or my religion! Christian doctrines are something, nay with Christians, great things. If every one, who says he believes the Bible, is to be held to understand it aright, and to teach it truly-and charity will not allow, and religious liberty will not tolerate, the questioning of any one's soundness in the faith-but if all are bound to say that all doctrines are equally good and equally efficacious to save sinners, why religion is at 16 an end. You may as well tear down your churches, and burn your Bibles. No, you must leave every man to the untramnel- ed libcrty, ofI' his own couscieunce, not only as to what doctrines he will hold iiinmself-but as to the confidence and fellowship which he will extend to others in their doctrines. Every faith must be toulrated by law-bit every doctrine must not be sanc- tioned by Christians. I hold hIat Unitarians undermine the very foundation of the gospel. They have a right, as far as man is concerned, to risk their own salvation on their doctrines; but they have no right to require me to risk mine, or by connivance to encourage other persons to risk theirs-and they invade my liberty and my conscience when they try to do it, I understand Jesus Christ .o be Divine in the highest sense of Deity-and to deny that is with me to deny the gospel. I will not therefore be compelled to have fellowship-(why how can you compel fel- lowship?) with any who deny it. And I hold to be one with such those who will countenance them religiously-nay if they profess to know and do really know better, they are more to be blamed on that account-----for to him that knoweth to do good and doeth it not, to him it is sin. I cannot be forced to sanction this universal connivance at men's errors. Nor indeed can my accuser. He informed me-----he informed the Board Thursday night, that Ultra-IUziversalists were not permitted to preach in his pulpit. Then it is not correct as he has said, that his pulpit has no doors-----it has doors to exclude the Ultra-Universalists. But who are they? Savages?-----Turks? -----Devils?-----nay verily---men entitled to all our sympathies----- mine, yours ----Mr. Taylor's, no less than any other man's. Men like ourselves. Why exclude them? Mr. Taylor's charity is wide as the sea and as the land. Why does it exclude these ultras? Who au- thorized. him to call them ULTRAS? Is this the name they give themselves? I think not. The reason simply is, that in Mr. Taylor's judgment they have extracted from the Bible a system that denies the gospel. Now, if he may in his all expanded and pure charity, without bigotry or offence to religious liberty, bar up his doorless pulpit against these people, with what face can he revile me for acting upon the same principle according to my best discretion? Exercising that discretion on that, principle, (and'can this man justly blame me for it?) I exclude from my pulpit Universalists that are not called by him Ultras, and then Unitarians, and then as part and parcel, hand and glove with them, himself! Mr. Taylor could, I hope in his sailor days, navigate a ship better than he does an argument----he has given up the principle 17 .--he has allowed the right and duty-----and hence he has raised a clamor against me for nothing. He has excited all this lumult, because I have treated him, as he treats Ultra-Universalists! If they are MEN, they are entitled to the same sympathy with him- self-----and if I am wrong, no less is he. And now, fellow-citizens, you have heard my defence. There is a sense in which I am not responsible to you-----and I tell you plainly, that unless I get far other light, I shall do again just what I have done now, for I am sure I have done right----- and no man may hinder me in what is my clear duty to God and his truth. Nor will I regard the frown of all mankind, or, compared with the principle, care for their displeasure. There is another sense in which I am responsible to you. I have said that I deem myself to be arraigned at your bar. Nor do I come there unwillingly. I have called you together to an- swer for myself before you. You have my defence-you are an in- telligent and just people and I am willing you should decide this case. I ask no favor. I desire neither God nor man to protect me in the wrong. If I have done wrong, I pray you say so---and I bow to your judgment with deep respect, if not conviction. If I hare done right----I pray you say so. You are competent to decide----- and justice demands that you do so. And justice is all I ask. For, however much I know that I have offended God and man in countless things, and however unfit to stand before God, and account for myself in other things, I do not fear as to this to meet my accuser at the judgment. And as I can lay my hand upon my heart, and, as I appeal to God to decide between us, feel that I am safe; so I can freely say to you, judge this case fairly, in the light of truth,-----of reason, liberty, and the fear of God ---and I'm content. I ask no more. C (APPENDIX A.)(APPENDIX A.) Mr. Taylor had an undoubted and perfect right to visit this place, asa free citizen-minister of the gospel-friend of seamen or in any other honest capa- city, and address the people, as long as they might please to hear him. Such being his unquestionable right, it is in itself a very unimportant question whether any one over invited him to come here or not. I alluded to the mat- ter in my defence, because attempts, as I was informed, had been very indus- triously made to discredit me with the public, and to aggravate what was called my rudeness to this stranger, by insisting upon the peculiar sacredness of his character, as a person come from a great distance, at the oficial, and very special invitation of the Board of Managers of the Bethel Union, to plead the cause of this Institution-an Institution in which I professed a great interest. Having ascertained that Mr. Taylor never had been so invited, however he might have been led to think so, I deemed it proper to say pub- licly that in fact no nffcial invitation had been extended to him. The next morning after the delivery of this speech, the Rev. Mr. Heywood, the Uni- tarian clergyman of this city, called on me at an early hour, to say, in sub- stance, among other things, all of which he said in a very kind and respectful way, (for which, in these hard times, he is entitled to my thanks,) that I had hardly done Mr. Taylor justice, in my representation, the evening before, of this motter-that Mr. Taylor certainly considered himself oflicially invited- that such seemed to be the fact, and even it were not literally so, it was scarcely fair to make the statement as I had done. I assured Mr. H. that I had no question of the fact being as I stated it-that truth and right seemed to require me to defend myself from the incidental, as well as the direct imputa- tions which had been cast upon me-that I had not only a perfect willingness, but a desire, publicly to correct any false impression that might have been made by any thing said by me-but that in the present instance I did not per- ceive that any thing had been said that was not strictly correct in fact, and un- der the circumstances needful to be stated. 20 This matter, so unimportant intrinsically, has had additional consequence attached to it, by the following card issued on the morning of the 4th of June. TO THE PUBLIC. IN view of certain remarks made by the Rev. Ai. reckinridge of this city, in his defence, on the nieht of the 1st of June, calculated lo impress the public mind with the idea that the Rev. Mr. Taylor, seamen's chaplain in Boston, was not regularly invited here; we, the undersigned, feel it our duty, in the absence of our President, to makei the following statemrents: tlt we hearir MAr. Dickinson, the President of our Board, state, at its mecting, on Friday, nlay 2Sth, Rev. Mir. Breckinridge being present, hlnt lie, as Presideni t of ihe Board, had written a lelter of ilvitation to Rev. Mr. Taylor, in crmprliani:e with ithe rene-t of a lIegulnrly called meeting of the Board; at which (al:lboigh the memlbers had been generally nolified) Ihere wns not a quorum present; and, tl,e'efore, we consider hiln regularly invited here. Signed Daniel Jl'Ca.lisler, .1 C. Back/es, Samuel Pennington, Win. S. Vernon S. S. Goodwin, P. II. Cornant. I deemed it sufficent to issue the iillowing card: TO THE PUBLIC. NY fallow citizens have probally observed a communication in the Journal of his mornio,.signed lby imniel IM-Caliter anld oliers, referring to the difficlthy ble- tween Rev. Mr. Tavlor and lnyself. It cen hiardly be expected of rl e t ntti eir ae- condury assailants iil this mlater, thongh under ie-porniible names, especially as the principi l lie pubilily declined to notice liy defence against lle original atl'uck upon mne. It seemls ,als peculiarly needless in this cane, as ihe gentlenren them- selves, though meaninig to discredit tne, coifirm, to the letter, all that 1 have said on the point referred, to, viz: that the Board gave no invitation, for that is 'no Bourd where th re s qor;eihr io r ; icteis the Pre1sident the Board,ss sa ely every one ltnows. I have thought it proper, however, to use this occasion ned method to asy tllat, as soon as it can be gotten through the pre.s, my defence will be given to tihe public in a permanent form; in a note to which, I shnll embody such le.lirnony on this point, ea may satisfy oven these gentlemen, if, as I trust, the love of truth be the motive iprompting their interference. W. L. BRECKINKIDGE. I furbear to make any commem rt on this itmoveniont, flrther than to say, tiat at the meeting of the Board referred to liy these geotlcnmen when tile Presi- dent, "Mr. Breckinridge being present," .tutred thatl he hiad written to Mr. T; the Presidornt did also with the records of the Board in his hand", and examin- ing them, declare, thrse genilemtnr b/ing present, tlhat there was no record of any action of the Board about it. Having, previously to the appearance of those gentlemen's Card, determined to print my Speech, and having perceived from my interview with Mr. Heywood, the propriety of a clear and full expla - nation of the question about Mr. Taylor's invitation to this city, I opened a correspondence with the Secretary of the Board of Managers of the Bethel Union, which is as follows: LOUISVILLE, June 3d, 1841. 31s. JoHN P. S.aerrr, DEan SIH:-Will you do me the favor to inform me in your capacity as Secre- tary of the Board of Managers of the Bethel Union of this city, whether there is any 21 record in their books, of an invitation from that Board to the Rev. Mr. Taylor to visit this city-and if there he any, to give me a copy of it? If there be none, I will bs obliged by any othar information which you can give me on that subject. I am very respectfully, W. L. BRECKINRIDGE. LoUIsVILLE, June 3d, 1841. Rev. Var. Breciauarinsc , DEAk Sim:-Your note of this date is before me, in which you request me to inform you, in my official capacity as Secretary of the Board of Managers of the Bethel Union of Louisville, whether there is any record in their books, of an invita- t;on from that Board to the Rev. Mr. Taylor, to visit this city, and if there be any, to give you a copy of it. If there be none, you wish any other infolmation which I can give you on the subject. In reply I will say that there is no record on the books of the Board, of an invitation to the Rev. Mr. Taylor to visit this city, and the rea- son why there is no record of the invitation is, that at the meeting, adjourned from the 25th March to the 8th April, there was not a quorum of the Board in attendance. Nevertiteless the subject of the invitation was discussed Eemi-officially, and it was theunnnimnous opinion of all present, that Mr. Dichin-on should invite Mr. Taylor to visit us. I do not recollect how many were present, for there being no quorum, I kept no minutes of the proceedings. I can moreover state, that at a subsequent meeting, Mr. Dickinson stated that he had written to Mlr. Taylor on the suhject, and that his answer was, that he could be with us through part of the month of June, but that he should be compelled to return, so as to be in Boston by the 4th of July. Your's, Respectfully, JOIIN P. SMITH. JUNE 4, 1841. Mr. John P. Smith: Dear Sir-I am sorry to trouble you again, but circumstances require that I should be particularly informed, and you will oblige me, as your note of last evening does notmale that point clear-by stating explicitly, whether "the subsequent meeting" at which "Mr. Dickinson stated that he had written to Mr. Taylor on the subject," &amp;c., was a meeting of the Board regularly called or held, with a quorum present, and if so, whether there was any formal sanction by the Board at that, or any subsequent meeting, appearing on their records, of the semi- official action of the first meeting referred to in your note. If there be any buch re- cord, I muht trouble you to send me a certified copy of it. I am, very respectfully, W. L. BRECKINRIDGE. JUNE 4, 1841. Dear Sir-I have only to say in reply to your note of this morning, that there was no record kept of the invitation to the Rev. Mr. Taylor, in either of the meetings mentioned in my note of yesterday; and I find that the Board took notice only of the arrival of Mr. Taylor, on the 25th of May, which was the only meeting at which a quorum attended, after the 25th of March. At that meeting, there were present 14 22 members, 10 making a quorum-when a committee of five, together with the Prea- ident, was appointed to confer with Mr. Taylor on the interest of the Bethel cause. Your's, Respectfully, JOHN P. SMITH. Rev. W. L. Breckinridge. It appears then, I humbly conceive, that no official invitation-no invita tion from the Board, was ever extended to Mr. Taylor to come to Louisville. This community is too intelligent, ir general, and too well acquainted with the proper management of business, in particular, to make it proper, much less needful, fur me to argue gravely the question whether gentlemen-tho' individually members of a Board-when met in numbers insufficient by the rules of the Association to constitute a quorum, and disqualified therefore from doing business, are THE BOARD. For the same reasons, I may not undertake to prove that the President of a Board has not, except by distinct law of the society or by special delegation, a right to spenk fur the Board in any such sense as to render his act theirs-especially, when as in the present case there had been no Board convened. If such a principle be acted upon in our Banks, Insurance Companies, and other similar Corporations-or our legisla- tive and ecclesiastical bodies, I confess I have been ignorant of it. And it ap,ears to me that such a principle cannot be admiitted-else there is no security against the precipitancy, mismanagement, or want of principle of our associates in the various bodies in which we do business. I am informed too upon such authority, as must be fully credited, that at this very semi-otlicial meet- ing, this meeting which had not a quorum, but which these six very respectable and intelligent gentlemen, all of them business men, think was such that they may conclude MIr. Taylor to have been regularly invited-at this very meeting- it being evident that it was not a meeting of the Board-the question was made in conversation, what if our conclusion be not sanctioned bythie Board (!)-how shall Mr. Taylor's expenses be paid? It shows conclusively that at that stage of the matter, it was no act of tile Board. Nor does it appear, that there has ever been any action of the Board, sanctioning the "unanimous" conclusion of the "semi-official discussion"-unless the appointment by the Board of a commit- tee to confer with Mr. Taylor after his arrival occurred, may be construed into such a confirmation. Perhaps my six friends will "conclude" it to be "regu- larly" about the same thing-but I conceive it to be a very different affair. I may be mistaken in my conjecture, but I am induced to suspect that the project of bringing Mr. Taylor here started with Unitarians, who were acquainted with Iis character. Whether the motive was an unmingled desire to bless the Boatmen, or that, blended with a wish to have the influence of Mr. 23 Taylor in their behalf, and the weight of his name in their favor, when he should come, it is not for me to say. Nor can I say how far Mr. Taylor understood it so-or if at all. But as far as I can learn, Mr. Conant (whose name I feel at liberty to introduce here, though personally a stranger to him, as he placed it to the card of my six friends) if not, as I suppose he was, the first to propose the arrangement-was much engaged in the scheme at an early stage of it-and when the enquiry was started, as before mentioned, how is Mr. Taylor to be remunerated for coming, if the Board do not comfirm this ,semi-official," though still "regular" invitation-M-r. Conant expressed such a desire for his visit as led him to pledge himself for the amount, if need be. Whether Mr. C. is a member of that society strictly speaking, I do not know, but in the present controversy he has been very decidedly on the Unitarian side. [I will be allowed to say, that, as I am informed, although Mr. Taylor- when I gave public notice in his presence of my intention to notice, at a cer- tain time and place, his attack on me-informed the assembly that he should make no reply having more important matters to attend to, &amp;c., assuming that lordly air which is so very convenient sometimes to certain classes of people, lie has yet thought proper, in nearly if not quite all his public ad- dresses since, to make more or less pointed and gross insinuations against me, and in private circles, even to strangers to himself, and my personal friends, to repeat his defamations-forgetting his dignified and lofty position at first assumed. I learn farther that on a second occasion in the Unitarian Church, he entertained his hearers with a discourse apparently designed to depict me, founded on a passage in the early partof the 6th c. of Nehemiah, perhaps the 3d v. I conceive as a very intelligent gentleman who heard him remarked to me, that he would have found a passage more appropriate to the circumstances in Ezra 4th c. 3d v. It may not be amiss to add in illustration of his character, that he declared himself willing to admit the DEVIL into his pulpit, if he would preach the gospel! He seems to think better of Satan himself than of Ultra-Universal- ists. Does he dislike the Ultras so much, because they allow his friend. nothing?]
