
    
        
            	Skip to content [Accesskey '1']
	Skip to navigation [Accesskey '2']


        

        



            
            


    


    

        
        
                	About Us
	Services
	People
	Events
	Newsletter
	Contact Us
	Media
	Feedback


            

        
            Pinsent Masons
        

    





    
        
            [image: Out-Law.com - Legal news and guidance from Pinsent Masons]
            [image: ]
        
    
        
	
    
        
            Search
            
            
        

        
    




    

    
    

    
        	
                        
                            Home
                        
                    
	
                        
                            Legal info byTopic
                        
 	
    
        
            	
                Property

                
            
	
                Litigation & International Arbitration

                
            
	
                Pensions

                
            
	
                EU & Competition

                
            
	
                Regulatory

                
            
	
                Intellectual Property

                
            
	
                Tax

                
            
	
                Construction Advisory & Disputes

                
            


        
    
	
    
        
            	
                Banking & Restructuring

                
            
	
                Employment

                
            
	
                Corporate

                
            
	
                Insurance

                
            
	
                TMT & Sourcing

                
            
	
                Commercial

                
            
	
                Projects

                
            


        
    


    
                    
	
                        
                            Legal info bySector
                        
 	
    
        
            	
                Energy and natural resources

                
            
	
                Infrastructure

                
            
	
                Core Industries & Markets

                
                    	
                        Retail
                    
	
                        Sport
                    
	
                        Hotels
                    
	
                        Gambling
                    
	
                        Real estate
                    
	
                        Housing
                    
	
                        Public sector
                    
	
                        Life sciences
                    
	
                        Universities and higher education
                    


                
            


        
    
	
    
        
            	
                Financial Services

                
            
	
                Advanced Manufacturing & Technology Services

                
            


        
    


    
                    
	


        
	
            
                Sign in to my account
            
        


    









     
        	
        
            
                Topics
            
        

    
	
        
            
                Intellectual Property
            
        

    
	
        
        
            
            Copyright
        

    


    




            
            
                

                
                    
    
        
            Researchers given 'data mining' right under new UK copyright laws

            
                Copying content from online journals or other texts for the purposes of non-commercial research is no longer an infringement of UK copyright laws providing copiers have lawful access to that content and they, generally, make "a sufficient acknowledgement" of the original work.02 Jun 2014
                
                

                


    
        
        	
        Copyright
    
	
        TMT & Sourcing
    
	
        Intellectual Property
    
	
        Media and creative industries
    
	
        Life sciences
    
	
        Universities and higher education
    
	
        Core Industries & Markets
    


    





            


            
                
	The new exception to copyright, which relates to text or data mining for non-commercial research, is just one of a number of changes to UK copyright laws that came into force on 1 June.

Copyright holders can require researchers to pay to access their content but cannot then restrict text or data mining for non-commercial purposes thereafter, under the new rules.

However, researchers that use the text or data they have mined for anything other than a non-commercial purpose will be said to have infringed copyright, unless the activity has the consent of rights holders. In addition, the sale of the text or data mined by researchers is prohibited.

Text or data mining are terms that describe how technology can be used to analyse vast amounts of content in an automated way to extract information from it. Researchers were previously prevented using software to read data from journal articles without specific permission from the copyright owners, even if they had already paid to access that material.

Other changes to the law give libraries, archives, museums, schools and other educational establishments the freedom to copy copyrighted works and make them available to the public to access on a "dedicated terminal on its premises" for research or private study purposes.

The new rules also loosen restrictions on the sharing of single copies of copyrighted material between libraries and also allow for copyrighted works to be preserved in digital form without the act of copying by libraries, archives or museums being considered an infringement of copyright.

In addition, the UK's copyright framework now contains a right to use a copyrighted work to illustrate a point during school or university lessons in accordance with the established 'fair dealing' principle. The right is limited to cases where an illustration is "for a non-commercial purpose" and made by teachers, lecturers or students. Generally, it must also be accompanied by a sufficient acknowledgement of the original work.

Schools, colleges and universities can also now make copies of radio or TV broadcasts for a non-commercial educational purpose without infringing copyright. Similarly, the act of copying and using extracts of copyrighted material by educational establishments "for the purposes of instruction for a non-commercial purpose" is also permitted under the new copyright laws. In both cases, copiers must generally make a sufficient acknowledgment of the original work.

The right to copy and use extracts does not extend to copying more than 5% of a copyrighted work over the course of a year.

"Many of the changes have rightly been introduced to reflect the modern teaching methods adopted by educational institutions," intellectual property law expert Emily Swithenbank of Pinsent Masons, the law firm behind Out-Law.com, said. "Use for distance learning purposes is now allowed and whereas previously only minor acts of copying for non-commercial teaching purposes were permitted if made by hand, this exception to copyright infringement has now been widened to permit copying by digital technology."

"The new exceptions do not however allow educational establishments to disregard existing licensing schemes. The exceptions operate in conjunction with the licences that must be obtained if available but if those licences seek to restrict copying in a way that would now be permitted by the changes, educational establishments can rely on the wider copyright exceptions to use the work without infringing copyright," she said.

Other changes to the UK's copyright laws that have been made include new rules that give disabled people greater access to copyrighted material. Works of general scientific, technical, commercial or economic interest that are already available for public inspection can be copied and made available to access more widely over the internet by public bodies under other amendments that have been made.

"These common sense reforms will update the UK’s copyright system for the digital age, and help to build and maintain public confidence and respect for copyright," Intellectual property minister Lord Younger said in a statement. "These changes bring an end to many instances where people carrying out minor, reasonable acts of copying could have found themselves on the wrong side of the law."

"The text and data mining exception is a particularly important step forward for researchers in the UK and will ensure they have the tools that they need to maintain their competitive edge in an increasingly global marketplace," he said.

The government also said that it remains committed to introducing further changes to the copyright framework which would create new rights to make private copies of copyrighted material and use copyrighted content in works of parody or in quotation. The regulations containing those proposed changes to the law have yet to be approved by the UK parliament.



            

            
            

            
                
            

            


    

    
    	
	
	
	
	
	


    
    




            

    
        Useful Links

        	
        The Copyright and Rights in Performances (Research, Education, Libraries and Archives) Regulations 2014
        
    
	
        The Copyright and Rights in Performances (Disability) Regulations 2014
        
    
	
        The Copyright (Public Administration) Regulations 2014
        
    


    





            


    More from Out-Law.com

    
    

    
        	UK government may be underestimating 'economic impact' of copyright reforms on creators, warns Peers 09 May 2014



	Possible delay to new UK private copying and parody rights 08 May 2014



	UK copyright law changes brought before parliament 28 Mar 2014



	Government anticipates further delay to UK copyright reforms 13 Mar 2014





    



            
        


        
            


    
        Tweet
    

    
        
    

    
        
        
    




            



    Related Sectors

    
    

    
        	Life sciences
	Universities and higher education
	Core Industries & Markets


    

    All sectors



            


    Latest Copyright News & Guides

    
    

    
        	Viewing freely available copyrighted material on websites does not require rights holders' permission, rules CJEU 05 Jun 2014



	Man behind Newzbin operations found liable for copyright infringement on the sites 23 May 2014



	Oracle wins US appeal against Google in software copyright case 12 May 2014



	Guide: Unwitting infringements and the law



	Guide: Podcasting: the legal issues





    



        

    


                

                
                    

    

    Join My Out-Law

    
        	See only the content that matters to you
	Tailor Out-Law to your exact needs
	Save the most useful content for later reading
	Tailor our weekly eNewsletter to your interests


        
            
                Join My Out-Law
            
        

        
            Already signed up to My Out-Law?
            Sign in
        

    




    


    Pinsent Masons

    Expertise in Copyright

    
        Copyright is an extremely valuable, often unrecognised or misunderstood right which protects a whole range of original materials including written materials, software, artistic materials, music and dramatic works.  It arises automatically without the need for registration in most countries and protects these materials from unauthorised copying.  It is essential in business to identify such rights, ensure they are owned by the correct entity, properly protected, enforced and exploited. 

        More about Copyright

        


    

    
        	
            


    [image: Profile picture of Catrin Turner] 


    Catrin Turner
    Consultant


    
        View profile
    


        
	
            


    [image: Profile picture of Cerys Wyn Davies] 


    Cerys Wyn Davies
    Partner


    
        View profile
    


        


    


    

    More about Pinsent Masons



    




    


    
    
        
        
            
            [image: Learn how to fine tune Out-Law to your interests]
            
            Learn how to fine tune Out-Law to your interests 
        
    



    
        
        
            
            [image: Find out more...]
            
            Find out more... 
        
    







                

                
            

            
            


    
        	Legal Notices
	Cookies
	Privacy
	Site Map
	Accessibility
	All News Feeds
	Subscribe to our RSS feed


        © Copyright Pinsent Masons LLP
    



            
            
            
            
        

    

