
  [image: ----------------------------------------]
  [image: ----------------------------------------]
    KDD-2000 
	  Workshop on Text Mining - Call for Papers

    August 20, 2000

  [image: ----------------------------------------]
  [image: ----------------------------------------] 

  To be held at 
  KDD-2000, 
  Sixth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery 
  and Data Mining, August 20-23, 2000, Boston, MA, USA


  Invited speakers :
 
  	Ronen Feldman , Instinct Software, Israel
    
	David Lewis, AT&T Research, USA
  



  
  Call for participation ensuring
  your copy of the workshop notes is open 
  till July 14. Please 
  register by sending e-mail 
  with your contact information to one of 
  the program chairs.
  We can not guarantee availability of the workshop notes 
  for late registrations. 
  Please notice that you should also 
  register 
  for the main conference. 
  Collection of a fee (no more than $20) for the workshop notes 
  will be handled by ACM and collected on site. 

  

  Call for papers 
  on the following topics is 
  open till May 15, 2000. 



  Below are
  submission guidelines, 
  attendance information,
  important dates and
  organization details.

  [image: ----------------------------------------] 


Workshop Description


The growing importance of electronic media for storing and
exchanging text documents has led to a growing interest in
tools and approaches for dealing with unstructured
or semi-structured information included in the text documents.
In addition to well-organized and maintained text databases,
one of the important sources of textual information is the
World Wide Web which is expected to continue to grow in the number
of users and amount of information available.



Methods developed for mining structured and unstructured
data sets as well as text learning and natural language
processing techniques are essential for analysis of textual data.
While many approaches to text processing are based on
statistics and thus only weakly dependent on the language
the data is written in, those that involve deeper linguistic
processing are typically aimed at English texts. Furthermore,
an important step towards exploiting information from texts
is automated information extraction from large document sets
and building more or less domain specific knowledge bases.



This leads to interesting and important questions of scalability
of developed approaches and their applicability to a variety
of document formats and languages.

[bookmark: topics]
  [image: ----------------------------------------]

Topics of interest



The objective of this workshop is to enable presentation and 
exchange of ideas on various aspects of Text Mining.
Our desire is to facilitate communication among researchers 
and practitioners from related and complementary
research areas, who are working on similar problems
but with possibly different focus and problem solving approaches.
More precisely, we invite papers from the four areas:

	Text Mining (or Text Learning) (TM) 
  
	Information Retrieval (IR) 
  
	Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
  
	Information Extraction (IE).




Particular topics of interest for the workshop include
but are not limited to:
	 text mining & information retrieval
  
	 text mining & natural language processing
  
	 text mining & web mining
  
	 text representation
  
	 text categorization
  
	 text segmentation
  
	 information extraction
  
	 scalability of developed approaches
  
	 performance evaluation measures
  
	 feature selection
  
	 multilingual approaches to text mining
  
	 influence of domain and domain specific text mining
  
	 innovative applications of text mining.




[bookmark: invited]
 [image: ----------------------------------------] 

Invited Talks


  Invited talk by Ronen Feldman:
  "Text Mining: Opportunities and Challenges"



  The information age has made it easy to receive and store large 
  amounts of data. The proliferation of documents available - on the Web, 
  in corporate intranets, on news wires and elsewhere - is overwhelming. 
  However, while the amount of data available to us is forever increasing, 
  our ability to absorb and process this information has remained constant. 
  Search engines only exacerbate the problem by making more and more 
  documents available in a matter of a few keystrokes; so-called "push" 
  technology makes the problem even worse by constantly reminding us that 
  we are failing to follow critical news, events, and trends. 
  We experience information overload, and miss important patterns even 
  as they unfold before us.



  Text Mining is a new and exciting area of research that tackles 
  this problem through techniques borrowed from data mining, 
  machine learning, information retrieval, natural-language understanding, 
  case-based reasoning, statistics, and knowledge management to help people
  gain rapid insight into large quantities of semi-structured or 
  unstructured text. Typically, it involves preprocessing a document 
  collection (e.g., through text categorization or term extraction), 
  storing , indexing and analyzing the intermediate representations 
  (through distribution analysis, document clustering, trend analysis, 
  and association rule discovery), and presenting the results graphically.



  In my talk I will present some of the new challenges facing the 
  text mining community, with particular focus on the representation 
  of documents and the ability to provide better insights into document 
  collections. I will also try to provide a consumer perspective into 
  text mining while reviewing the business opportunities that currently 
  exist in this area.



  Invited talk by David Lewis:
  "ATTICS: A Toolkit for Text Classification and Text Mining"



  ATTICS is an extensible text classification system recently implemented 
  in C++ at AT&T Labs and available for research purposes. In spirit it 
  is a hybrid between text retrieval systems such as SMART and machine 
  learning toolkits such as MLC++. The design, data model, and emphasis 
  on online classifier application are unusual for either type of software.
  While ATTICS is primarily intended for online text classification, 
  its flexible architecture and support for both textual and non-textual 
  data make it applicable to many text mining tasks. I will discuss 
  how ATTICS can be used for text mining, and when it is or isn't a better 
  choice than other tools. 

[bookmark: guide]
  [image: ----------------------------------------]

Submission Guidelines



Submissions should be sent by May 15, 2000,
in the electronic form as a PDF or PostScript file to
Dunja.Mladenic@cs.cmu.edu,
Subject: KDD-2000 workshop submission paper.



Each submission should indicate which of the four areas listed
above it best fits into (TM, IR, NLP, IE).
The length and formatting of the submissions should follow
the 
KDD-2000 recommendations 
for submissions (max. 20 pages, single column, a line spacing 1.5, no smaller than 12-point font, at least 1 inch margin on each side) or 
for camera ready (max. 12 pages, two columns, etc. - see 

the templates).



Submitted papers will be reviewed by referees from the Program Committee. 
Accepted papers will be published in the working notes
provided by ACM. 
The authors will be notified about the acceptance or rejection of their
papers by
June 15, 2000. Camera-ready versions of the papers are due July 11, 2000.

[bookmark: attend]
  [image: ----------------------------------------] 

Attendance



Attendance is not limited to the paper authors.
We strongly encourage interested researchers from related
areas to attend the workshop.
One of the objectives of the workshop is to 
promote the interaction among reseachers and 
the development of the text mining area of research. 

[bookmark: dates]

Important Dates

	Submission Deadline:	May 15, 2000 
	Acceptance Notification:	June 15, 2000 
	Workshop registration:	July 14, 2000 
	Camera-ready Copies:	July 11, 2000 
	Workshop date:	August 20, 2000 



[bookmark: org]
  [image: ----------------------------------------] 
Organization


Program Chairs


Marko Grobelnik

J.Stefan Institute, Jamova 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 

Marko.Grobelnik@ijs.si 



Dunja Mladenic
 
J.Stefan Institute, Jamova 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia and
Carnegie Mellon University, School of Computer Science, 
Pittsburgh, USA, 5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Dunja.Mladenic@cs.cmu.edu



Natasa
Milic-Frayling

Microsoft Research Ltd, St. George House, 1 Guildhall Street
Cambridge, CB2 3NH, United Kingdom 

natasamf@microsoft.com




Program Committee



  
	
  Helena Ahonen,University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
  
	
  Simon Corston-Oliver, Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA
  
	
  Mark Craven, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin
  
	
  Walter Daelemans, University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium
  
	
  Susan Dumais, Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA
  
	
  David Elworthy, Microsoft Research Ltd, Cambridge, UK 
  
	
  Ronen Feldman, Instinct Software, Israel
  
	
  Marko Grobelnik, J.Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia
  
	
  Thorsten Joachims, Universitaet Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany 
  
	
  Rosie Jones, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
  
	
  Natasa Milic-Frayling, Microsoft Research Ltd, Cambridge, UK
  
	
  Dunja Mladenic, J.Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia
  
	
  Jason Rennie, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MA
  
	
  Stephen Robertson, Microsoft Research Ltd, Cambridge, UK
  
	
  Sean Slattery, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
  
	
  Ian Witten, University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand 
  



  
  This Workshop is partially supported by the
  European FP5 project 
  "Data Mining and Decision Support for Business Competitiveness: A European
Virtual Enterprise 
  (Sol-Eu-Net)".

  [image: ----------------------------------------] 

  
