[image: DHQ Logo]
[image: Digital Humanities Quarterly Logo]

homesubmissionsabout dhqdhq peoplecontact
 




Current Issue
	2017: 11.4

Preview Issue
	2018: 12.1

Previous Issues
	2017: 11.3
	2017: 11.2
	2017: 11.1
	2016: 10.4
	2016: 10.3
	2016: 10.2
	2016: 10.1
	2015: 9.4
	2015: 9.3
	2015: 9.2
	2015: 9.1
	2014: 8.4
	2014: 8.3
	2014: 8.2
	2014: 8.1
	2013: 7.3
	2013: 7.2
	2013: 7.1
	2012: 6.3
	2012: 6.2
	2012: 6.1
	2011: 5.3
	2011: 5.2
	2011: 5.1
	2010: 4.2
	2010: 4.1
	2009: 3.4
	2009: 3.3
	2009: 3.2
	2009: 3.1
	2008: 2.1
	2007: 1.2
	2007: 1.1

Indexes
	 Title
	 Author


[image: sidenavbarimg]ISSN 1938-4122

Announcements
	Call for Reviewers
	Call for Submissions


[image: button1-addthis.gif]

DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly
2017
Volume 11 Number 3
2017 11.3
                     | 
                    XML

| 
		   Discuss
			(
				Comments
			)
                



    
        
            
                
                Recovering the London Stage Information Bank:
                    Lessons from an Early Humanities Computing Project

                Mattie Burkert <mattie_dot_burkert_at_usu_dot_edu>, Utah State University

            
            

            
        
        
        
        
     


    
        
            Abstract

                
                 This paper traces the little-known history of the London
                        Stage Information Bank, a digital initiative that ran from 1970 to
                    1978 under the direction of Professor Ben R. Schneider, Jr. at Lawrence
                    University. With support from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the
                    American Council of Learned Societies, and the Mellon Foundation, Schneider’s
                    team produced a database from the multi-volume reference work The London Stage 1660-1800 (Southern Illinois
                    University Press, 1960-68). Today, however, most of the project’s outputs are
                    lost or damaged, and its history has been largely forgotten in both theater
                    studies and eighteenth-century studies. This essay traces the history of the
                    Information Bank and my efforts to recover its damaged data and code, offering
                    the project as an object lesson in questions of access, preservation, and
                    institutional memory that digital humanities practitioners continue to confront
                    in 2017. I argue that the project faded into obscurity, not only because of
                    technological obsolescence, but also because the development team was unable to
                    promote the kinds of research questions and behaviors that would enable their
                    tool's widespread adoption and survival. The indifference of literary and
                    theater scholars to the Information Bank throughout
                    the late 1970s and early 1980s demonstrates how vital it is that digital and
                    computational humanities work articulate its meaningfulness within existing
                    intellectual and disciplinary traditions. While digital scholars build new
                    avenues for inquiry that expand and transform humanities research, the survival
                    of these approaches depends on their relationship to current humanities
                    questions, methods, commitments, and epistemologies.

            

            
        
        
            1
The year is 1970. Scholars of British theater are celebrating the recent publication
                of The London Stage, 1660-1800, an 11-book, 8000-page
                calendar of theatrical performances in London over a 140-year period. After more
                than a decade conducting the archival and editorial work necessary to produce this
                reference work, the advisory board seeks outside help constructing an index, which
                they hope will allow researchers to cross-reference information about a given play
                title or actor across volumes. The theater scholar they choose for the job, a
                dabbler in the new field of humanities computing, is confident that a program can
                perform this task better than a person. He assembles an international team of
                humanities scholars, technologists, and students, garners hundreds of thousands of
                dollars in private and federal funding, and spends the better part of a decade
                producing a database and a suite of tools for accessing and manipulating it. In the
                end, however, his team’s work is lost to technological obsolescence, as well as to
                the indifference of a scholarly community unconvinced of the need for such digital
                and computational approaches to humanities research. 

            2
This is the story of the London Stage Information Bank,
                an early humanities computing project that presents irresistible parallels to many
                issues facing digital humanities today. The project ran from 1970 to 1978 under the
                direction of Professor Ben Ross Schneider, Jr. at Lawrence University in Appleton,
                Wisconsin, and it was enabled by grants from the National Endowment for the
                Humanities, the American Council of Learned Societies, the Mellon Foundation, and
                other major funders. Today, however, most of the project’s outputs are lost or
                damaged, its history largely forgotten. This essay presents a study of the archival
                record and material artifacts of this project, positioning the Information Bank as an object lesson in issues of access, preservation,
                and institutional memory that digital scholars continue to confront in 2017. 

            3
More than a mere cautionary tale about data loss, however, the history of the Information Bank illuminates the need for researchers to
                articulate the relationship of digital research methods to existing intellectual and
                disciplinary traditions. I will argue that the project faded into obscurity, not
                only because it was ahead of its time or because the rapid advancement of computing
                technology took the team by surprise, but also because Schneider made key
                assumptions about the intellectual dispositions of his user base. Proceeding from
                those assumptions, his team did not promote the kinds of research practices that
                would ensure their tool’s widespread adoption and survival. Their presentations and
                publications exhibited the capabilities of the database but largely assumed that its
                usefulness would be self-evident–a tendency that continues today in many demoes of
                digital humananities datasets and tools. While digital scholars can and should build
                new avenues for inquiry that expand and transform humanities research, the survival
                of these approaches depends on their relationship to current humanities questions,
                methods, commitments, and epistemologies. Digital humanities practitioners must
                model the modes of inquiry our work enables and demonstrate that these modes allow
                us to produce new, exciting knowledge that is legible to humanists who do not
                identify as digital scholars.

            4
This essay first presents a history of the London Stage
                    Information Bank and my ongoing effort to recover it, then synthesizes
                the lessons that can be learned from the project and suggests future applications of
                those lessons. In doing so, it contributes to the growing body of work that
                recognizes the importance of a reciprocal exchange of perspectives between theater
                and performance studies and digital humanities. As Debra Caplan has recently pointed
                out, the historical lack of interaction between the two communities has led to
                serious issues of accessibility and preservation in digital theater studies: “Without disciplinary-wide best practices for creating,
                        funding, disseminating, or reviewing digital humanities work, projects are
                        often idiosyncratic in the technologies and approaches they choose, and
                        projects are not always equally accessible”
                     [Caplan 2015, 358–59]. At the same time, as Sarah Bay-Cheng has argued and as Caplan echoes,
                theater studies researchers also have much to offer to the digital humanities,
                particularly in their long tradition of attention to the ephemerality of
                interactions–a problem that is inherent both to performance history and to digital
                media and culture [Bay-Cheng 2012].[1] This interplay between ephemerality and durability,
                dramatized in the ability of a fleeting performance event to leave traces and create
                impacts that ripple out across time, resonates with recent media archaeological work
                within digital humanities. Jussi Parikka reminds us that digitally encoded
                information, often imagined in terms of its “immaterial virtuality,” is in fact
                dependent on “hardware, software, and other material contexts” that are
                    “prone to deterioration;” for Parikka, “[t]he digital is not eternal, nor is it simply
                        ephemeral”
                     [Parikka 2012, 118–19]. Matthew Kirschenbaum similarly highlights the tension between the mutability
                and resilience of digital inscriptions on physical media in his book Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination
                [Kirschenbaum 2008], his emphasis often falling on the curious
                survival of seemingly evanescent digital texts.[2] This is a tension that accords especially well
                with theater studies, where an interest in ephemerality must be balanced with an
                awareness of the mediated afterlife of performance. 

            5
In both theater studies and media archaeology, then, poststructuralist notions of the
                    “always already disappearing” object of study are confronted by a growing
                awareness of the stubborn material residue of those objects’ transmission [Bloom et al. 2013, 167]. The London Stage
                    Information Bank exemplifies this tension: it was lost to technological
                change, yet it survives in at least partially recoverable forms. Furthermore,
                notions of residue and resonance drive us to recognize not only how the material
                stuff of hardware, software, and data persist, but also how more abstract
                artifacts–data models, for instance, that reflect particular orientations toward the
                objects under consideration–are passed down and inherited from collection to
                collection, from tool to tool.[3] My attempt to recover both
                the history and the material artifacts of this forgotten project illustrates the
                productive interplay between the theoretical orientations of theater history,
                performance studies, and media archaeological approaches within digital
                humanities.

            
                History of the Information Bank

                6
The eleven books of The London Stage, 1660-1800: A Calendar
                        of Plays, Entertainments & Afterpieces, Together with Casts,
                        Box-Receipts and Contemporary Comment. Compiled from the Playbills,
                        Newspapers and Theatrical Diaries of the Period were published by
                    Southern Illinois University Press between 1960 and 1968. These books contain
                    extensive information about nearly all recorded performances thought to have
                    taken place in London over the course of the long eighteenth century, based on
                    archival evidence held in libraries throughout the U.S. and the U.K. The volumes
                    are organized by theatrical season, with a typical entry representing a
                    performance at a specific theater on a specific evening. It usually gives the
                    date or approximate date of the performance, the title of the main play staged,
                    the cast list if known, and any other entertainments that accompanied the main
                    attraction. Some entries specify the amount of money that the theater made that
                    evening, mention prominent audience members, or detail the provenance of the
                    information in the entry (Figure 1).

                
                    
                    [image: ]

                Figure 1. 
A typical entry from The London Stage,
                            1660-1800 (Avery et al 1960-68, Part 4, Vol. 1, p. 325). This
                        entry represents a performance at the Theatre Royal–Drury Lane
                            (“DL”) on Saturday, October 14, 1752. The main play
                        performed was The Beggar’s Opera, a ballad
                        opera by John Gay that was popular throughout the century. The cast list is
                        provided, showing that, for example, the leading role of Macheath was played
                        by an actor named Beard. The description of the hornpipe and country dance
                        featured in this performance are assumed to come from the newspaper
                        advertisement or playbill on which this entry is based. Queen Mab is the title of the afterpiece, a shorter
                        entertainment that would have been performed after the conclusion of The Beggar’s Opera. “As 12
                        Oct”. indicates that a cast list is provided in the advertisement
                        but omitted here because it is identical to the one that appears in an entry
                        for a performance two days earlier. (See Note 8 for additional information
                        on the abbreviation of cast lists in The London
                            Stage.) An additional dance performance titled Matelot Basque was featured. The theater sold
                        approximately £100 worth of tickets that evening, according to the receipt
                        book maintained by prompter Richard Cross.


                7
The London Stage is clearly a valuable resource for
                    theater history, but it also has serious limitations. One major issue is that
                    its indices are volume-specific, making it difficult to trace particular actors
                    or play titles across decades. This obstacle has been partially redressed by the
                    recent release of searchable full-text scans of the reference books through
                    HathiTrust, but one must still perform a single keyword search on each of the
                    eleven books individually.[4] Importantly, neither the reference books nor
                    their digitized counterparts can readily support complex queries that go beyond
                    indexing to describe relationships among objects and persons, a limitation that
                    has been recognized from the beginning. Schneider and his programmer partner,
                    Will Daland, detailed the books’ limited operability in 1971, in an article that
                    appeared in the journal Computers and the
                        Humanities: “If, for example, one wished to determine how many times
                            actor X and actress Y performed in the same play together during their
                            careers, it might be necessary to scan a period of fifteen or twenty
                            years (possibly 800 to 1,000 pages) to exhaust all the possibilities of
                            intersection”
                         [Schneider and Daland 1971, 209]. The previous year, Schneider had been approached by the editorial board
                    of the series to create a computerized index of all of the volumes.[5] By 1979, Schneider’s team had published The Index to The London Stage, which contained entries
                    for the entities they thought researchers would be most interested in, such as
                    actor names; in the process, they created the Information
                        Bank. Schneider’s Index, now available
                    on HathiTrust, can provide some guidance for researchers, but it represents only
                    a fraction of all possible questions one could ask of the database.

                8
It is possible to reconstruct the workflow involved in the transformation of the
                    reference book into data, using the introduction to the Index along with a memoir Schneider wrote about the process titled
                        Travels in Computerland
                    [Schneider 1974]. Schneider recruited a small group of editors,
                    mostly PhD students in eighteenth-century British theater, who were promised
                    first use of the new tool in exchange for their contributions to the database.
                    The editors, along with Schneider, created a marked-up copy of the printed
                    reference book, using colored pencils to denote items that were to be coded in
                    specific ways, such as performance headers, cast lists, or extraneous text that
                    should be delimited from the main entry.[6] The hand-annotated pages were
                    then shipped to China Data Systems in Hong Kong, where professional typists
                    transcribed the marked-up text. They simultaneously standardized elements like
                    punctuation according to rules defined by Schneider, and they also coded the
                    editorial markups using a pre-defined custom schema. 

                9
The transcribed and coded text was sent to Information Control Incorporated in
                    Kansas City, where it underwent Optical Character Recognition (OCR). The results
                    were stored on magnetic tapes that were returned to Appleton, where an
                    interactive program called ICIFIX, created by Daland, was used to perform
                    additional correction and standardization.[7] Daland also developed a suite of
                    programs, using the PL/1 language, to perform a variety of tasks: translating
                    the markup used by the typists into human-readable tags, expanding the cast
                    lists that were abbreviated by the reference book editors to save on production
                    costs, and sorting or querying the data according to predetermined fields (date,
                    theatre, title, role, actor, type of act) as well as tagged named entitles
                    (historical people and places, textual sources).[8] These programs
                    were combined into a system called GWSJR1 (after George Winchester Stone, Jr.,
                    one of the original London Stage editors and patron
                    of the Information Bank project) and stored on an
                    IBM 2311 disk.

                10
During the project’s second phase–outlined in a second memoir by Schneider,
                    titled My Personal Computer and Other Family Crises
                    [Schneider 1984]–a programmer named Reid Watts developed a
                    word-processing and concordance program called SITAR specifically for the
                    project. Completed in 1974, SITAR then was used by as many as eighteen
                    undergraduate student assistants to iteratively edit the underlying data for
                    errors and inconsistencies before it was run through GWSJR1 to produce the
                        Index[9] (Figure 2). 

                
                    
                    [image: ]

                Figure 2. 
Schneider with three of the undergraduate students who edited and
                        corrected the Information Bank data after the
                        project’s pilot phase. Source: The Lawrentian,
                        30 April 1976, courtesy of Lawrence University Archives. 


                11
The Index was completed in 1978 and published in
                    1979, signaling the end of the grant-funded phases of the project. However,
                    Schneider continued to try to establish an ongoing maintenance and preservation
                    plan for its various products. The underlying data for the Information Bank was stored on tapes that Lawrence intended to host
                    in perpetuity, fulfilling scholarly inquiries at the base cost of computing
                    power, in accordance with NEH guidelines (Figure 3). However, at the end of the
                    1970s, Lawrence stopped paying to time-share the computer they were using at a
                    nearby research institute. In 1980, approaching retirement, Schneider tried to
                    find a new home for the database where it would have ongoing technical support.
                    Unfortunately, no one wanted to host it–in part because the technology was
                    becoming gradually more obsolete, and in part because there had turned out to be
                    very limited scholarly interest in the Information
                        Bank.[10] In 1983, the tapes were transferred to the Harvard Theatre
                    Collection, as a storage repository rather than as a new base for operations.
                    Shortly thereafter, the curators lent out the tapes to be migrated onto a new
                    medium, at which point they appear to have been lost.[11]
                

                
                    
                    [image: ]

                Figure 3. 
John Church (left) of the Institute for Paper Chemistry poses for a photo
                        with Schneider (right) and programmer Will Daland (center). The Institute
                        hosted the computers on which the Information
                            Bank was developed and on which it was always intended to be
                        maintained. After Lawrence University stopped paying for time on the
                        Institute’s computers in 1978, this was no longer a sustainable hosting
                        solution. Source: Lawrence Alumnus, March 1971,
                        courtesy of Lawrence University Archives.


                12
As this brief sketch of the London Stage Project’s history suggests, it was a
                    highly ambitious endeavor involving dozens of personnel, including professional
                    typists, OCR experts, programmers, graduate student editors, and numerous
                    undergraduate assistants. It was awarded a total of $200,000 in funding over
                    eight years, the equivalent of roughly $750,000 today.[12] It was
                    considered a success insofar as it produced a number of significant
                    deliverables. One of these was a flat-file database of the original reference
                    book that categorized the data within the performance entries. Other products
                    included a system (GWSJR1) that expanded the abbreviated cast lists and allowed
                    the data to be queried based on pre-defined categories; an interactive program
                    (SITAR) that allowed the data to be edited and updated iteratively by
                    non-programming specialists, and that also enabled concordance-style sorting and
                    searching of the data; and the printed Index to the London
                        Stage, which contains about 500,000 references to over 25,000
                    items.

                13
Despite the successes of the project, however, there are serious material and
                    technological barriers to accessing it today. Not only were the data tapes lost
                    after being transferred to the Harvard Theatre Collection, but even if they
                    could be found, and even if an appropriate machine could be located to read
                    them, it is likely that they would be materially degraded and might be damaged
                    by being run through a machine. Given these realities, it is possible to see the
                        London Stage Information Bank as a cautionary
                    tale of a near-decade of work lost. The next section explores in more detail why
                    the scholarly community was uninterested in the Information
                        Bank and what lessons the project has to offer for digital
                    humanities work today. 

            

            
                Lessons from the London Stage Project

                14
In order to discover why the Information Bank was
                    lost to history, I turned to Schneider’s own writings about the project–the two
                    memoirs mentioned above, along with a series of articles published in scholarly
                    journals and edited collections–as well as to the records of the project, now
                    housed in the Lawrence University Archives. Taken together, these documents
                    reveal several factors that contributed to the Information
                        Bank’s fate: the difficulty of developing tools that speak to
                    current humanities research questions while also opening up new avenues of
                    inquiry; the need to work within the incentive structures of academe, which are
                    sometimes ill-suited to new forms of intellectual productivity; the tendency of
                    scholar-programmers to develop custom software and datasets from scratch rather
                    than consulting the past or the community for models and precedents; and the
                    relentless pace of advancement in computing technology, which all but ensures
                    that projects developed on the time scales of humanities scholarship will be
                    obsolete by the time they are complete. This list is likely to strike a chord
                    with digital humanities practitioners today grappling with many of the same
                    issues.

                15
The archive of the London Stage Project immediately reveals a central tension
                    between the novelty of what computers could do with humanities information and
                    the assumption that computers were self-evidently useful tools for pursuing
                    existing humanities research questions. In Travels in
                        Computerland, Schneider extolls the virtues of the Information Bank, boasting that it will enable
                    researchers to see new kinds of patterns in theater history: 
                        We can study trends (the rise of pantomime; the interest
                            in Shakespeare; the rise and fall of theatres; the decline of the
                            drama); we can look for patterns (In what ways is one season like
                            another? What is a typical stage career like? To what extent do actors
                            specialize? What is the effect of the repertory system?). There’s too
                            much information about 18th century theatre; without computer help we
                            can’t see the forest for the trees.
                         [Schneider 1974, 230]
                    

 Yet despite all the new questions a database of The
                        London Stage could potentially raise and answer, Schneider’s Information Bank garnered little attention from
                    eighteenth-century scholars. Five years after his optimistic assessment in
                        Travels in Computerland, he wrote an essay for
                    an edited collection on Data Bases in the Humanities and
                        Social Sciences lamenting the lack of interest. As the article
                    explains, the Information Bank was publicized
                    widely to the research community as a search service; in the database’s first
                    three years of availability to the public, it was advertised in seven
                    newsletters sent to 1000 subscribers, as well as fourteen scholarly journals. In
                    that time Schneider received 126 requests for information, including 34 requests
                    for price quotes, but by 1979 not one researcher had followed through and paid
                    for the results of his or her queries [Schneider 1980, 31–34].

                16
While Schneider states bitterly and with only minimal irony that “the failure
                        of the world to beat a path to my door is truly a mystery to me,” he does
                    offer a provisional explanation of his colleagues’ indifference to the new tool: 
                        Most of the research that goes on in theatre history
                            today is precisely the kind of thing one can do just as well without the
                            computer. At the point where a good computer printout of the repertoires
                            of all the actors who played Shylock might reveal a great deal about the
                            staging of The Merchant of Venice, it would
                            never occur to a writer on that subject (or to his reader) that the
                            question deserved further research in the form of a complete list of all
                            the roles of all the actors of Shylock. The kind of thing you can do now
                            by computer is not the kind of thing that anyone ever did, or felt the
                            need to do.
                         [Schneider 1980, 34]
                    

 This assertion that the database can answer unprecedented, unintuitive
                    questions for humanities researchers is somewhat at odds with Schneider’s
                    earlier insistence that the database was of obvious relevance to current
                    scholarship. Indeed, the questions about generic trends, acting careers, and
                    theater finances that Schneider listed off in 1974 were relevant to theater
                    historians in the mid-twentieth century, and they remain relevant today; the
                    database altered the scope and speed of inquiry into these topics, but not
                    necessarily the range of possible queries. Yet by 1980, Schneider had also
                    identified a mismatch between the kinds of questions that interested scholars at
                    the time and the kinds of questions a computer could answer. For Schneider, the
                    fundamental issue was that his database was ahead of its time–and certainly, it
                    was an uphill battle to ask humanities researchers to think quantitatively or at
                    scale. Then as now, scholars of both literature and theater tended to focus a
                    given study on a limited number of texts or performances, sometimes even a
                    single work or writer. On the other hand, there is a way in which the Information Bank could be seen in the 1980s as behind the times. The potentially new possibilities
                    for inquiry that the database offered were simultaneously aligned with
                    old-fashioned forms of theater history characterized by the search for factual
                    information about past performances and by the urge to count them. In the early
                    decades of the “cultural turn,” applications of
                    poststructuralist theories represented the leading edge of humanities
                    research–and stood firmly against the arguably positivistic orientation of the
                        Information Bank.
                

                17
As this account suggests, the Information Bank
                    struggled to define itself simultaneously as part of an existing intellectual
                    tradition and as the next wave of scholarship, a balancing act that continues to
                    challenge digital humanities practitioners. The archive furthermore indicates
                    that Schneider and his team missed key opportunities to model the new kinds of
                    inquiry that the Information Bank offered and to
                    articulate these techniques’ role within ongoing conversations in the field. The
                    climax of Travels in Computerland revolves around
                    the last-minute rush to process queries for graduate student editors Leonard
                    Leff and Muriel Friedman to use in their presentations at the MLA 1971 annual
                    meeting in Chicago.[13] These results, originally expected in late summer, were
                    delivered in mid-December, about two weeks before the conference. This lag
                    occurred because the technical side of the operation was focused on
                    error-correction while the research side wanted only good-enough data to produce
                    sample results as a proof of concept for fellow scholars [Schneider 1974, 143, 202, 212–13]. The final narrative
                    chapter of Travels ends with an unplanned
                    trans-Atlantic flight and an eleventh-hour triumph over programmatic errors,
                    leading to the successful production of the output needed for the MLA seminar;
                    unfortunately, help came too late, as Schneider is forced to admit in the
                    memoir’s postscript: 
                        The reader may still be wondering how the seminar turned
                            out at the Modern Language Association….Well, although Muriel brought
                            her printout to the meeting, she did not treat it specifically, and
                            Leonard, not having time to study his, left it at home and gave a
                            theoretical discussion of the subject. Two months later I heard from a
                            scholar who’d been there that he’d gotten the distinct impression that
                            the project had fallen short of its goals.
                         [Schneider 1974, 244]
                    

 The team was unable to demonstrate the kinds of results that could be
                    obtained from querying the new database and the ways that those results could
                    shed new light on current scholarly problems–such as, in Leff’s case, the
                    casting of Richard Brinsley Sheridan plays over time and the relationship of
                    anti-Irish sentiment to the casting of controversial roles [Schneider 1974, 194–95]. Furthermore, this anecdote points to
                    the misfit between the London Stage Project’s outputs and the incentive
                    structures within which its personnel operated. The graduate student editors who
                    dedicated their time to the project were not able to translate that work into
                    concrete findings that could be used for their dissertations, an issue that the
                    scholarly community continues to work through today as we debate the best ways
                    to articulate the value of data curation and digital tool development for
                    hiring, promotion, and tenure–particularly when that labor leads to productive
                    failures rather than peer-reviewed products like articles and books. 

                18
 In another parallel to the present day, Schneider found himself up against other
                    academics’ impulse to reinvent the wheel. While offering Information Bank queries at cost to researchers, Schneider also
                    offered his programs for purchase. Yet his 1980 essay indicates that there, too,
                    interest fell short of expectations. He found that new humanities computing
                    projects were unwilling to invest in prefabricated programs that could be
                    lightly tailored to their purposes: “For some reason, almost everyone would rather write
                            software from scratch than get it at a fraction of the cost ready-made,
                            thoroughly tested and debugged.…It does not seem to occur to scholars
                            embarked for the first time on computer projects that what they want to
                            do has ever been done before”
                         [Schneider 1980, 33]. The unnecessary duplication of effort continues in the digital
                    humanities community today, as granting agencies have historically tended to
                    award projects that are building something new, rather than those that are
                    drawing on or sustaining existing resources. This funding situation creates
                    incentives to make new tools instead of adapting, maintaining, or updating ones
                    that have already been made. The result is the disappearance of many projects
                    that might otherwise form the foundation for subsequent work: Robin Camille
                    Davis has found that nearly half of the projects presented at the 2005 Digital
                    Humanities conference were no longer online a decade later [Davis 2015]. 

                19
As the imperative to incentive sustainability and avoid duplication of effort has
                    become more visible, sites like DHCommons and the Mellon-funded DiRT Directory have emerged to help
                    people with similar interests find pre-existing tools as well as collaborators.
                    The NEH’s Office of Digital Humanities has taken the important step of extending
                    its Advancement Grants to projects “revitalizing and/or recovering
                        existing digital projects,” rather than only incentivizing the creation
                    of brand new ones. Likewise, the ACLS Digital
                        Extension Grants are aimed at “enhancing established digital
                        projects and extending their reach to new communities of users,” rather
                    than providing startup funding for nascent projects. In addition, many digital
                    humanities research centers are beginning to take a tiered approach,
                    differentiating between researchers whose projects can be accomplished using
                    out-of-the-box solutions and those who truly need to build their projects from
                    the ground up. These signs point to a growing commitment to raise the survival
                    and adoption rates of digital humanities projects, ending the cycle of
                    reinvention and reduplication. 

                20
In his efforts to market his tools, Schneider not only discovered that his
                    humanities computing colleagues preferred to build their own software from the
                    ground up; he also learned that his products were considered obsolete, making
                    them increasingly difficult to market to those who might adopt or adapt them to
                    other purposes. In response to this growing threat, Schneider was defiant. The
                    Lawrence University archive houses a poignant 1976 letter in which Schneider
                    responds to a potential funder’s concerns about his technology being out of
                    date: Our system cannot become obsolete from advances in
                        hardware, because our programs are written in BASIC and PL/1, assiduously
                        supported by Digital Equipment Corporation and IBM, the two leading computer
                        manufacturers: there is no chance that either will build computers that are
                        incompatible with these programming languages, or that Lawrence would be so
                        foolhardy as to buy computers incompatible with ten years programming
                            work.[14]

 Such a statement may sound hubristic, but four
                    decades later, digital humanists still tend to underestimate the speed with
                    which our projects will become outdated. Digital preservation specialists
                    continue to warn humanities researchers and digital content producers that the
                    apparently durable file formats and access mechanisms of the present day are
                    less stable than they may appear [Conway 2010]
                    [Library of Congress 2013]. Schneider’s story stands as a warning: if we wish for
                    future projects to be able to build on our tools and datasets without having to
                    start from scratch, then we must ensure that our outputs are designed to be
                    accessible for years and decades to come. 

            

            
                Recovery Efforts and Directions Forward

                21
While it is true that much of Schneider’s work was lost, in recent years I have
                    unearthed the project’s partial remains and, with the help of many
                    collaborators, begun recovering their functionality. Erin Dix, Archivist at
                    Lawrence University, helped me retrieve not only the paper files from the
                    project, but a set of 3.5" floppy discs labeled “LSP_data”
                    containing plain-text ASCII files and metadata suggesting they were written in
                        1990.[15] The data
                    appears to represent a large majority of the performances from the original
                    reference book, although some gaps have been identified; notably, several
                    seasons from the 1730s and the 1780s are missing. It is unclear whether the data
                    represents the edits made over the years by research assistants, or whether it
                    represents the raw data as it arrived from Information Control Incorporated on
                    magnetic tapes; it may also represent some intermediate stage.[16] What is clear, however, is
                    that it has not been run through the programs that parsed the data
                    for querying and expanded the cast lists; equally clear is that it has been
                    converted from EBCDIC to ASCII, with some unintended consequences. The
                    underlying hexadecimal code has been shifted such that most of the performance
                    dates are represented as special characters rather than numerals.[17] Derek Miller has developed a script that corrects the hex; it
                    is important to note, however, that the data itself cannot be forensically
                    reverted, so programmatically corrected versions will always represent an
                    approximation of the original.[18]
                

                22
The Lawrence University Archives preserved this data as well as the grant
                    applications, correspondence, and press from the London Stage Project referenced
                    throughout this essay; they did not, however, preserve Daland’s code base,
                    perhaps because it was thought to be archived at Harvard.[19] Fortunately, Daland kept
                    printouts of the programs and their documentation in his personal files, and he
                    scanned and emailed these papers to me as a combination of PDF and TIF files.
                    Although we experimented extensively with scan settings and image processing
                    techniques to optimize the images for OCR, we ultimately found them to be
                    resistant to character recognition and resorted to hand-transcription of sample
                    sections of the code. Working with a mainframe computer at the University of
                    Wisconsin-Madison, we tried to compile and run a hand-transcribed and -corrected
                    version of STRUCTUR, the main parsing program. After exhaustive efforts to
                    reconstruct and compile the programs in their original form, we determined that
                    doing so would be impractical; it would force us to reproduce and deal with
                    numerous constraints around memory, character sets, and encoding scheme
                    conversion that need not be factors in a modern computing environment. As a
                    result, I am currently collaborating with Todd Hugie (Director of Library
                    Information Technology, Utah State University) to re-engineer the code base in
                    Python, creating a new parser for the recovered flat-file data based on the
                    principles represented in Daland’s code. From there, we plan to transform the
                    data into XML and JSON formats for preservation and sharing, then import the
                    data into a relational database such as MySQL or MariaDB.[20]

                23
Our work to restore the London Stage Information
                        Bank responds to several needs in the scholarly community, including
                    a fundamental need for a database of the performance records in The London Stage. The reference books remain one of
                    the most frequently consulted resources in eighteenth-century studies, and while
                    they are available in searchable form through HathiTrust, keyword search remains
                    an unsatisfactory method of querying the rich, relational information contained
                    in those pages. Scholars continue to perform hand-counts of performances of
                    interest, as Elaine McGirr does in her monograph on playwright, actor, and
                    theater manager Colley Cibber [McGirr 2016], and as the Cambridge
                    Ben Jonson project did in constructing their searchable “Performance Archive” of stagings of Jonson plays from the
                    seventeenth century to the present.[21] In 2016, publisher Adam Matthew released a new primary source
                    collection, Eighteenth Century Drama: Censorship, Society
                        and the Stage, which is based on the Huntington Library’s Larpent
                    Collection and includes a searchable database based on The
                        London Stage. This release generated significant interest in the
                    eighteenth-century and theater studies communities, but the limitations quickly
                    became apparent: the collection carries a high subscription fee and only
                    institutions, not individual scholars, are permitted to subscribe, making the
                    collection inaccessible to all but members of the wealthiest institutions.
                    Furthermore, the database itself is designed to permit queries only along
                    specific parameters such as title or date, rather than any kind of exploratory
                    statistical analysis of the full dataset. For these reasons, an open-access,
                    open-source database remains desirable to many researchers in these fields. 

                24
As I and my collaborators undertake to re-engineer and revitalize the London Stage Information Bank, we are mindful of the
                    obvious lessons in preservation and sustainability offered by the history
                    sketched out above; any new version of the database will need to adhere to
                    current best practices for sustainability, developed in consultation with
                    librarians and archivists who have expertise in this area. However, we are also
                    aware that one of the best ways to ensure preservation is to attract and
                    maintain a large and engaged user base. In order to avoid the disconnect
                    explored above between the original tool’s affordances and the dispositions and
                    concerns of its target users, the new London Stage
                    database would need to be adapted in several key ways to meet the needs of
                    today’s humanities scholars: it would need to acknowledge its genealogy by
                    building on the past iterations; it would need to accommodate and even highlight
                    the ambiguity and messiness of the data; and it would need to contribute to
                    current efforts to develop data ontologies that make sense for theater studies.
                    The rest of this essay considers how these features would enable the database to
                    speak to current questions and debates in humanities scholarship.

                25
Beyond offering a useful research tool, a London
                        Stage database built on the foundations of the Information Bank would contribute to recent efforts to expose the
                    epistemological foundations of the 1970s- and 1980s-era humanities computing
                    projects that continue to underpin many large-scale databases used today.[22] Users who wish only to investigate
                    specific questions about the theater of the time could do so, but the resource
                    would also accommodate those hoping to examine more closely the layered history
                    of the system itself. We envision an interface that allows users to download and
                    view our reengineered parsing program alongside the original version; likewise,
                    we imagine allowing users to download the flat-file database in its raw and
                    parsed forms, as well as versions of the same data stored in XML and JSON
                    formats. Such an interface would offer a unique opportunity to look underneath
                    the hood of a 1970s-era humanities computing project, and to compare the
                    underlying technological and ontological structures of Schneider’s database to
                    those of its updated counterpart. This comparison could offer a window onto the
                    architecture and assumptions about the nature of humanities data that formed the
                    invisible foundation for humanities computing work in the era–assumptions that
                    eventually made their way into many of the digital resources we rely on today,
                    often without full knowledge of their provenance or architecture. In this
                    respect, our project responds to Bonnie Mak and Ian Gadd’s calls for what Mak
                    calls an “archaeological approach” to collections like Early English Books Online that incorporate and
                    reproduce the biases inherent in cataloging, preservation, and digitization
                    efforts that go back decades [Mak 2014]
                    [Gadd 2009]
                    [Gadd 2015].[23]
                

                26
In the case of the London Stage Information Bank, we
                    can already begin to suggest the orientation towards humanities data that it
                    represents, based on the query results published as the Index to the London Stage. Domain-specialist users of the Index have long recognized in its entries an
                    orientation towards historical data that is ill suited to the ambiguity
                    surrounding much of this material. For instance, a recent case study of
                    eighteenth-century London playbills shows that the many theatrical adaptations
                    of Aphra Behn’s Oroonoko, which often go by the
                    same name in The London Stage, actually represent a
                    variety of responses to and interpretations of the Oroonoko legend [Vareschi and Burkert 2016]. This kind of uncertainty in the historical record,
                    a reminder of our mediated access to the past, is not a concern built into the
                    architecture of the Information Bank. Instead,
                    Schneider’s database takes an equivalent string of characters (play title,
                    personal name, theater location, etc.) to signify a self-same historical
                    entity.

                27
The Information Bank also inherited many of the
                    problems built into its source material–such as, for instance, the lack of
                    reliable premiere dates for plays that debuted before the leading theaters began
                    running daily newspaper advertisements around 1705. Prior to that time, most
                    performance dates in The London Stage are largely
                    conjectures based on publication dates and references in published editions of
                    plays [Milhous and Hume 1974]. This kind of guessing results in entries
                    like one for a presumed February 1697 performance of Timoleon: “It is not certain what company produced this play, if
                            it was acted; and it may not have been staged”
                         [Avery et al. 1960–1968, 473]. Schneider’s database has no way of representing this kind of ambiguity,
                    which is central to how scholars today approach theater history and culture;
                    McGirr, for example, devotes several pages of her book on Cibber to a discussion
                    of the limitations of the available data about performances of his plays as
                    represented in The London Stage
                    [McGirr 2016, 10–13]. The Information
                        Bank’s approach is therefore out of step with today’s theories about
                    quantitative inquiry in the humanities, which aim to acknowledge the provenance,
                    limitations, and fuzziness of the data. While 1970s-era computing may have
                    required researchers to sacrifice complexity in order to conserve memory and
                    storage resources, today we have the capacity to encode more information about
                    the provenance and limitations of data, and many digital humanities projects are
                    actively invested in finding ways to register and visualize uncertainty. 

                28
The acknowledgment of ambiguity in the data takes on a particular importance for
                    theater studies, which, as Caplan notes, takes as its objects “incomplete
                        records of performance events rather than the live event itself.” For
                    Caplan, databases of theatrical records “tackle a recurring and significant challenge in our
                            field–the ephemerality of our medium and the dispersal of theatrical
                            ephemera that may shed light on a performance event”
                         [Caplan 2015, 356–57]. One prominent example is AusStage, an ambitious database of “programs,
                        ticket stubs, newspaper clippings and so on” that seeks to document all
                    dramatic performances across Australia from 2001 to the present, as well as some
                    additional historical performance events.[24] As Miller points out, projects like AusStage “force us to define
                        performance’s ontology,” articulating foundational premises such as “the relationship between performances and works, sex
                            and gender identities, and how our contemporary vocabulary for
                            performance translates that of previous eras”
                         [Miller forthcoming]. Building on his experience as a research coordinator for AusStage,
                    Jonathan Bollen has recently published an essay surveying the convergences and
                    divergences of data models for theater history; the comparison raises critical
                    questions about such fundamental issues as the basic unit of inquiry (A single
                    evening’s performance? An event lasting several evenings but having a common
                    title and cast? A production that might span multiple locations and years or
                    even decades of runs?). As more theater databases are developed, each must
                    decide whether to articulate its own unique ontology or to strive for
                    interoperability with other databases by adopting shared structures and
                    assumptions about the objects of study [Bollen 2016]. Our
                    revitalization of the London Stage Information Bank
                    would likewise need to engage in such critical self-reflection, deciding where
                    to maintain the existing data model and where to refine it, as a contributor to
                    ongoing efforts to develop data models tailored to theater studies.

                29
Ultimately, eighteenth-century literary, theatrical, and historical research
                    would be best served by a new London Stage database
                    that finds ways to foreground the situated, captured nature of the data and the
                    layered history of its transmissions and remediations; this is the direction we
                    hope to take the project in the future. At the same time, however, it is
                    important to realize that even our recognition of these gaps in the data is
                    mediated by the ways scholars have accessed and thought about these archival
                    records in the past. As Johanna Drucker and others have reminded us, the history
                    of the data’s collection and transmission is an intrinsic part of the object of
                    study; when we query a database of theater records, we actually query a database
                    of composite objects that encode the history of how performance has been seen,
                    recorded, preserved, cataloged and studied.[25] If we aim to acknowledge the messiness that lies behind the apparent
                    solidity of digital or numerical representation, a necessary step is to make
                    visible the projects that have helped to reveal or occlude that messiness over
                    the years, and to unpack the ways they worked to do so. Only then can we design,
                    make, and analyze in ways that resist reproducing unchecked assumptions that
                    went into the collection and curation of existing cultural archives and their
                    past digital remediations. 

                30
The reengineered Information Bank will not only
                    embody a cautionary tale about digital preservation and provide a revitalized,
                    open-access resource for exploring data about eighteenth-century theatrical
                    performances; just as importantly, it will model and enable a critical approach
                    to the architecture of that data. In doing so, it will align with the interests
                    and research dispositions of today’s humanities scholars, who often seek to
                    harness the possibilities of quantitative methods while maintaining a critical
                    stance towards the digital condition. In reflecting these current concerns, the
                    new resource will aim to reach a wider and more invested audience than
                    Schneider’s Information Bank was able to. Like an
                    eighteenth-century adaptation of an Elizabethan play recorded in the pages
                        of The London Stage, this database project
                    performs an act of recovery and revival that is simultaneously an act of
                    re-imagination–one that pushes against the temptation to view the current moment
                    as new and unprecedented, and instead invites its audience to a more layered
                    understanding of its place in larger cultural and historical processes.

            

            
                Acknowledgments

                31
I wish to thank Mark Vareschi for planting the seed of this project by pointing
                    me to Schneider and Daland’s 1971 Computers and the
                        Humanities essay; Erin Dix at the Lawrence University Archives for
                    her assistance locating and navigating the records of the London Stage Information Bank; members of Schneider’s original
                    team, including Cindy Serikaku and Nick Schneider, for helping to reconstruct
                    the history of the project, and especially Will Daland for his involvement with
                    the recovery effort and his careful review of the accuracy of my findings; Derek
                    Miller for writing a script to repair underlying hexadecimal errors in the
                    recovered data; Todd Hugie for his ongoing effort to reengineer Will’s code
                    base; Brad Pasanek for giving me the opportunity to share this work in its early
                    stages at the 2015 MLA annual meeting; Brianna Marshall and the Research Data
                    Services community at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, as well as Bronwen
                    Maseman and her graduate students, for their feedback on this work; Susan
                    Barribeau and Betty Rozum for connecting me with the right people to keep the
                    project going at key moments; Dorothea Salo, Cal Lee, Kam Woods, and Carl
                    Stahmer for patiently answering my media forensics questions; Steven Dast for
                    his help with image processing for OCR; Jack Keel for his assistance compiling
                    and debugging PL/1 code; and Steel Wagstaff, Irene Zimmerman, Angela
                    Moore-Swafford, and Angelina Zaytsev for their help making The London Stage available to the public through HathiTrust. This
                    work has been partially supported by funding from the Department of English at
                    Utah State University.

            

        
        
            
        
    

Notes
[1] 
                    Theatre Journal has recognized and begun attempting
                    to bridge this divide. In 2016, the journal published two special issues on
                        “Digital ‘Issues’: Rethinking Media in/and/as
                        Performance” (68.3, Sept. 2016) and “Theatre, the
                        Digital and the Analysis and Documentation of Performance” (68.4,
                    Dec. 2016).
[2]  Against the view of software
                    as immaterial, Kirschenbaum emphasizes the “material circumstances that leave
                        material (read: forensic) traces–in corporate archives, on whiteboards and
                        legal pads, in countless iterations of alpha versions and beta versions and
                        patches and upgrades”
                    [Kirschenbaum 2008, 15]. These are precisely the kinds of
                    forensic traces I bring to bear on my study of the London
                        Stage Information Bank and my efforts to recover its layers of
                    history and inscription.
[3]  Jonathan Bollen describes vividly the
                    persistence of data models even as the data is transformed for use in other
                    projects: “datasets have the fluidity of plastic; they flow when
                            prodded, pushed, or pressed, when the heat is turned up and when placed
                            under stress. In the vocabulary of project management, datasets are
                            dumped, scanned, stretched, squeezed, shoved, massaged, cleansed, and
                            washed–in plainer terms, refactored and reformatted–and when all else
                            fails, rekeyed…Inevitably, to migrate data is to manipulate: exports
                            reveal imperfections, imports throw exceptions. And in the process of
                            manipulation, one feels the resistance of the data model. Like a habit
                            to be retrained or plastic’s retention of its form, a dataset retains
                            the memory of its model even as it is transformed”
                         [Bollen 2016, 619]. Bollen draws here on his experience coordinating research for AusStage
                    (see Note 24), an ambitious theatrical database that absorbed data from several
                    precursors developed in the 1970s and 1980s.
[4]  In collaboration with Southern Illinois
                        University Press and HathiTrust, I was able to negotiate the release of
                        Google’s scans of The London Stage reference
                        books to the public. You can now search, view, and download all eleven books
                        at https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/000200105, as well as the
                            Index at https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/000299859. See Burkert 2014
                        for more information. 
[5]  The
                        compilers and editors of the original reference series who served as the
                        Advisory Board of the London Stage Information
                            Bank were William Van Lennep, Emmett L. Avery, Arthur H.
                        Scouten, George Winchester Stone, Jr., and Charles Beecher Hogan. Additional
                        Advisory Board Members included Allardyce Nicoll, Sybil Rosenfeld, Cecil
                        Price, Philip Highfill, Kalman Burnim, Carl Stratman, John Robinson, and
                        William Armstrong.
[6]  The graduate student markup
                        editors were Leonard Leff, Marcia Heinemann, Muriel Friedman, and Mark
                        Auburn. Additional non-specialist markup editors included Devon Schneider,
                        Ben Schneider III, and Dorothy Church.
[7]  This workflow was reviewed for
                        accuracy by Will Daland in 2015.
[8]  The so-called
                            “ladder system” of abbreviating casts lists was
                        developed by the editors to conserve ink and paper, but it remains a
                        perpetual frustration to users of the reference books. An illustrative
                        example is offered by an entry for Tuesday, June 25, 1708. The Constant Couple was performed at the Theatre
                        Royal – Drury Lane with a cast “As at Queen’s, 20 Oct. 1707, but Clincher Sr
                        – Pinkethman; Lady Lurewell – Mrs Knight; Parly – Mrs Moor” [Avery et al. 1960–1968, 172]. The researcher turns back 17 pages to
                        the entry for that date and finds a fuller cast list: “Sir Harry – Wilks;
                        Col. Standard – Mills; Smugler – Johnson; Vizard – Husband; Clincher Sr –
                        Bowen; Clincher Jr – Bullock; Dicky – Norris; Lady Lurewell – Mrs Oldfield;
                        Lady Darling – Mrs Powell; Angelica – Mrs Bradshaw”. Combining the
                        information from these two entries, it is possible to determine that the
                        cast list for the June 25 performance was as follows: Sir Harry – Wilks;
                        Col. Standard – Mills; Smugler – Johnson; Vizard – Husband; Clincher Sr –
                        Pinkethman; Clincher Jr – Bullock; Dicky – Norris; Lady Lurewell – Mrs
                        Knight; Lady Darling – Mrs Powell; Angelica – Mrs Bradshaw; Parly – Mrs
                        Moor. This illustration involves only two entries for the sake of
                        simplicity. However, in many instances, a researcher must follow the trail
                        back through numerous dates and many actor-role substitutions in order to
                        determine the cast list for a performance of interest.
[9] 
                        “Final report on Phase 2 (1972-1975),” retrieved
                        from Lawrence University Archives. The sixteen editors whose names I have
                        been able to gather are Catherine Boggs, Catherine Steiner, Marc Weinberger,
                        Joseph Jacobs, Ruth Steiner, Connie Hansen, Sarah Larsen, Laurie Johnson,
                        Sue Kock, Peter Pretkel, Lynn Seifert, Louise Freiberg, Elizabeth O’Brien,
                        Jan Surkamp, Mark Burrows, and Kathy Rosner. Accounts of the project,
                        including Schneider’s books as well as archival documents, vary as to
                        whether the total number of student editors was seventeen or eighteen.
                    
[10]  Correspondence retrieved from Lawrence University
                        Archives.
[11]  Private
                        correspondence with curator Susan Pyzynski in May 2014 indicated that the
                        tapes may have been lent to a faculty member at Harvard; according to a
                        February 2015 correspondence between Derek Miller and curator Micah Hoggatt,
                        the tapes were lent to the IT department.
[12]  The full list of
                        funders includes the National Endowment for the Humanities, the American
                        Council of Learned Societies, the American Philosophical Society, the Andrew
                        Mellon Foundation, the United States Steel Foundation, the Billy Rose
                        Foundation, Lawrence University, and individual gifts from Mrs. John A.
                        Logan, Charles Beecher Hogan, Faith Bradford, Dr. and Mrs. J. Merrill Knapp
                        Jr., and an anonymous Friend of Lawrence University.
[13]  The session in question is listed in the MLA 1971
                        program as Seminar 28, “The Future and Expansion of
                                The London Stage 1660-1800:
                            Computerized Information Bank,” led by George Winchester Stone,
                        Jr. on Tuesday, December 28. PMLA 86.6 (Nov.
                        1971): 1131.
[14]  Correspondence retrieved from Lawrence University
                            Archives.
[15]  No documentation of the specific provenance of these discs
                        accompanied them, nor did a search through the IT department or Archive logs
                        turn up evidence of the chain of transmission. It is unclear when or how the
                        data was migrated forward from magnetic tapes to floppy.
[16]  Daland
                        explained that the student editors on the project would have corrected the
                        raw source data, after it had been run through the correcting program
                        (ICISCAN) but before it had been run through the parsing program (STRUCTR)
                        and the cast-list-expansion program (LADDR). He compared this to correcting
                        the master of a tape, rather than the copies. For that reason, it remains
                        entirely possible that the data files recovered from the floppy disks at
                        Lawrence contain the data that continued to be corrected throughout the
                        1970s and was queried to produce the Index to the
                            London Stage[Schneider 1979]. (Phone
                        correspondence with Daland, April 2015).
[17]  Forensic
                        investigation of disk images of the floppies (using BitCurator) was
                        inconclusive but suggested the hexadecimal errors were not introduced
                        through the process of accessing or copying the data from the floppy disks.
                        I consulted with Carl Stahmer for an outside opinion, and he concurred that
                        the damage most likely happened during the EBCDIC to ASCII conversion that
                        produced the data on the disks, rather than during the process of accessing
                        the disks at a later date (correspondence with Carl Stahmer, April
                        2016).
[18]  Correspondence with Derek Miller, July
                        2015.
[19]  They did,
                        however, keep copies of SITAR and SORTSIT, programs developed after Daland
                        left the project that enabled the data to be continuously updated and sorted
                        (correspondence with Erin Dix, March 2016).
[20]  All of the data
                        and programs recovered from Lawrence, along with their documentation, have
                        been deposited with permission in MINDS@UW, the secure supported repository
                        of the University of Wisconsin-Madison. In addition, the scans Daland
                        produced of the printed code base were deposited in the same location, along
                        with all relevant documentation. The collection can be accessed at https://minds.wisconsin.edu/handle/1793/71768. This represents an
                        attempt to preserve the project’s outputs against the kind of total loss
                        that they nearly suffered once before.
[21]  The Performance Archive, based in part
                        on hand counts from The London Stage, is
                        available at http://universitypublishingonline.org/cambridge/benjonson/reference/k/browse/performance.
                        It is part of the interactive online companion to The
                            Cambridge Edition of the Works of Ben Jonson Online (2015).
                    
[22] 
                        For evidence of the growing understanding of the need to understand the
                        formative moments of digital humanities, when many projects were begun that
                        exert an invisible but powerful influence on digital humanities work today,
                        see the recent special issue of Digital Humanities
                            Quarterly on “Hidden Histories: Computing
                            and the Humanities c. 1965-1985.” The editors of that issue,
                        Julianne Nyhan and Andrew Flinn, recently published a related book titled
                            Computation and the Humanities: Towards an Oral
                            History of Digital Humanities
                        [Nyhan and Flinn 2016].
[23]  For a case study of the dangers of failing to
                        recognize these biases in the process leading to a dataset’s creation, see
                        Pechenick, Danforth, and Dodds on the limitations of the Google Books Corpus
                            [Pechenick et al. 2015].
[24]  AusStage, “Database Design” and “Data Scope,”
                        available at https://www.ausstage.edu.au/pages/learn/about/database-design.html
                        and https://www.ausstage.edu.au/pages/learn/about/database-design.html.
                    
[25]  Here I refer to Johanna
                        Drucker’s influential characterization of humanities data as
                            “capta,” a term that “acknowledges the situated, partial, and
                                constitutive character of knowledge production, the recognition that
                                knowledge is constructed, taken, not simply given as a natural
                                representation of a pre-existing fact”
                             [Drucker 2011]. Christof Schöch rejects the idea that a new term is needed, but
                        aligns with Drucker in his definition of data within humanities inquiry:
                            “a digital, selectively constructed, machine-actionable abstraction
                            representing some aspects of a given object of humanistic inquiry.”
                        This definition importantly draws attention to the added “layer of
                            mediation” created by transforming cultural artifacts into
                        discrete units of digital information [Schöch 2013]. Along
                        similar lines, see Gitelman and Jackson [Gitelman and Jackson 2013].
                    

Works Cited
Avery et al. 1960–1968  Avery, E. L., Hogan, C. B.,
                    Van Lennep, W., Scouten, A. H., and Stone, G. W. (eds), The
                        London Stage, 1660-1800: A Calendar of Plays, Entertainments and
                        Afterpieces, Together with Casts, Box-Receipts and Contemporary Comment.
                        Compiled from the Playbills, Newspapers and Theatrical Diaries of the
                        Period. Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale (1960-68).
                    Available at https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/000200105.
Bay-Cheng 2012 Bay-Cheng, S. “Pixelated Memories: Theatre History and Digital
                        Historiography,”
                    American Society for Theatre Research plenary,
                    Nashville, Tennessee, November 2012. Available at https://www.academia.edu/2131876/Pixelated_Memories_Theatre_History_and_Digital_Historiography
Bloom et al. 2013 Bloom, G., Bosman, A., and West,
                    W. N. “Ophelia’s Intertheatricality: Or, How Performance Is
                        History,”
                    Theatre Journal 65.2 (2013): 165-82. 
Bollen 2016 Bollen, J. “Data
                        Models for Theatre Research: People, Places, and Performance,”
                    Theatre Journal 68.4 (Dec. 2016): 615-632.
Burkert 2014 Burkert, M. “Digital Resource Announcement: The London Stage, 1660-1800.” Theater
                    History blog, Association for Theater in Higher Education (19 September 2014).
                    Available at http://www.athe.org/blogpost/1090217/197683/Digital-Resource-Announcement-The-London-Stage-1660-1800.
Caplan 2015 Caplan, D. “Notes
                        from the Frontier: Digital Scholarship and the Future of Theatre
                        Studies,”
                    Theatre Journal 67.2 (May 2015): 347-59.
Conway 2010 Conway, P. “Preservation in the Age of Google: Digitization, Digital Preservation, and
                        Dilemmas,”
                    The Library Quarterly 80.1 (2010): 61-79.
Davis 2015 Davis, R. C. “Taking
                        Care of Digital Efforts: A Multiplanar View of Project Afterlives,”
                    Modern Language Association, Vancouver, British
                    Columbia, January 2015. Available at: http://www.robincamille.com/presentations/mla2015
Drucker 2011 Drucker, J. “Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display,”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly, 5.1 (2011). Available
                    at: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/1/000091/000091.html
Gadd 2009 Gadd, I. “The Use and
                        Abuse of Early English Books Online,”
                    Literature Compass 6.3 (2009): 680–92, 
Gadd 2015 Gadd, I. “History of
                        Early English Books Online,”
                    Folgerpedia (27 March 2015). Available at http://folgerpedia.folger.edu/History_of_Early_English_Books_Online.
Gitelman and Jackson 2013 Gitelman, L. and
                    Jackson, V. “Introduction” to L. Gitelman (ed),
                        “Raw Data” Is an Oxymoron.
                    MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. (2013).
Kirschenbaum 2008 Kirschenbaum, M. Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination.
                    MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. (2008).
Library of Congress 2013 Library of Congress. “Sustainability of Digital Formats: Planning for Library of
                        Congress Collections.” Washington, D.C. (2013). Available at: http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/formats/sustain/sustain.shtml.
Mak 2014 Mak, B. “Archaeology of
                        a Digitization,”
                    Journal of the Association for Information Science and
                        Technology, 65.8 (2014): 1515-26. 
McGirr 2016 McGirr, E. Partial Histories: A Reappraisal of Colley Cibber. Palgrave
                    Macmillan, London (2016). 
Milhous and Hume 1974 Milhous, J. and Hume, R.
                        “Dating Play Premieres from Publication Data,
                        1660-1700,”
                    Harvard Library Bulletin 22 (1974): 374-405.
Miller forthcoming Miller, D. “Database and Performance.” In N. Leonhardt (ed), The Routledge Companion to Digital Humanities in Theatre and
                        Performance (forthcoming).
Nyhan and Flinn 2016 Nyhan, J. and Flinn, A. Computation and the Humanities: Towards an Oral History of
                        Digital Humanities. Springer (2016).
Parikka 2012 Parikka, J. What is Media Archaeology? Polity Press, Cambridge, UK
                    (2012).
Pechenick et al. 2015 Pechenick, E. A.,
                    Danforth, C. M., and Dodds, P. S., “Characterizing the
                        Google Books Corpus: Strong Limits to Inferences of Socio-Cultural and
                        Linguistic Evolution,”
                    PLoS ONE 10.10 (2015). Available at http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0137041.
Schneider 1971 Schneider, B. R. “The Production of Machine-Readable Text: Some of the
                        Variables,”
                    Computers and the Humanities 6.1 (1971):
                    39-47.
Schneider 1974 Schneider, B. R. Travels in Computerland; or, Incompatibilities and Interfaces:
                        A Full and True Account of the Implementation of the London Stage
                        Information Bank. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass. (1974).
Schneider 1979 Schneider. B. R. (ed), The Index to The London Stage. Southern Illinois
                    University Press, Carbondale (1979). Available at https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/000299859.
Schneider 1980 Schneider, B. R. “The London Stage Project: Its Status and Future.” In J.
                    Raben and G. Marks (eds), Data Bases in the Humanities and
                        Social Sciences. Ed. North Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam
                    (1980) 31–34.
Schneider 1984 Schneider, B. R. My Personal Computer and Other Family Crises; or, Ahab and
                        Alice in Microland. Macmillan, New York (1984).
Schneider and Daland 1971 Schneider, B.
                    R. and Daland, W. “The ‘London Stage’
                        Information Bank,”
                    Computers and the Humanities, 5.4 (1971): 209-14. 
Schöch 2013 Schöch, C. “Big?
                        Smart? Clean? Messy? Data in the Humanities,”
                    Journal of Digital Humanities, 2.3 (2013).
Vareschi and Burkert 2016 Vareschi, M. and
                    Burkert, M. “Archives, Numbers, Meaning: The
                        Eighteenth-Century Playbill at Scale,”
                    Theatre Journal 68.4 (2016): 597-613.

2017 11.3
             | 
            XML
            | 
            Print Article


Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

 
            URL: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000321/000321.html
Last updated:
            
 Comments: dhqinfo@digitalhumanities.org
 Published by:
            The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
Affiliated with: Literary and Linguistic Computing
 Copyright 2005 - 
[image: Creative Commons License]
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
        


