[image: DHQ Logo]
[image: Digital Humanities Quarterly Logo]

homesubmissionsabout dhqdhq peoplecontact
 




Current Issue
	2017: 11.3

Preview Issue
	2017: 11.4

Previous Issues
	2017: 11.2
	2017: 11.1
	2016: 10.4
	2016: 10.3
	2016: 10.2
	2016: 10.1
	2015: 9.4
	2015: 9.3
	2015: 9.2
	2015: 9.1
	2014: 8.4
	2014: 8.3
	2014: 8.2
	2014: 8.1
	2013: 7.3
	2013: 7.2
	2013: 7.1
	2012: 6.3
	2012: 6.2
	2012: 6.1
	2011: 5.3
	2011: 5.2
	2011: 5.1
	2010: 4.2
	2010: 4.1
	2009: 3.4
	2009: 3.3
	2009: 3.2
	2009: 3.1
	2008: 2.1
	2007: 1.2
	2007: 1.1

Indexes
	 Title
	 Author


[image: sidenavbarimg]ISSN 1938-4122

Announcements
	Call for Reviewers
	Call for Submissions


[image: button1-addthis.gif]

DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly
2017
Volume 11 Number 3
2017 11.3
                     | 
                    XML

| 
		   Discuss
			(
				Comments
			)
                



    
        
            
                
                Playing with Identities: Queering Digital Narratology and the
                    Exploration of Gender and Sexual Identities

                Calvin Fung <calvin_dot_fung_at_monash_dot_edu>, Monash University

            
            

            
        
        
        
        
     


    
        
            Abstract

                
                 This study builds upon previous research that discusses gender and sexual
                    identities and digital narratives by introducing a queer narratological approach
                    to character creation mechanics. First, Lisa Nakamura’s identity tourism and
                    narratological constructs are applied to formalize the concept of the
                    exploration in digital narratives. Second, exploration of gender and sexual
                    identities is demonstrated through a queer narratological analysis of two
                    digital narratives, Always Sometimes Monsters
                    (2014) and Hustle Cat (2016). Third, the
                    development of character creation mechanics in The
                        Sims (2000-2016) series is examined to reflect the advancement
                    toward progressive game designs. Concerns regarding a sexuality blind approach
                    and the downplaying of homophobia are addressed, and Helene Cixous’s
                    poststructuralist “other bisexuality” as a
                    transgressive product of the fluidity of identities in digital narratives is
                    emphasized. This study elaborates the often-disregarded workings of queer
                    narratology and theory in digital narratives or game designs.

            

            
        
        
            
                Introduction

                
                    
                        [A]nd if any should like the world I have made, and be
                            willing to be my subjects, they may imagine themselves such, and they
                            are such, I mean, in their minds, fancies or imaginations; but if they
                            cannot endure to be subjects, they may create worlds of their own, and
                            govern themselves as they please.
                         [Cavendish 2004, 224–225]
                    


                

                1
So ends Margaret Cavendish, the Duchess of Newcastle’s The
                        Description of a New World, Called The Blazing World first published
                    in 1666 and, as can be seen, the idea of imagining into existence a world of
                    one’s own through narrative is no novel one. In the digital age, however,
                    digital narratives give their readers or players an extra degree of freedom to
                    imagine and explore in narrative worlds with the interactivity that is
                    introduced. This article focuses on how digital narratives allow their players
                    to explore their gender and sexual identities.[1]

                2
Previous studies on sexuality and video games often quote Bastal [Bastal 2011a]
                    [Bastal 2011b], a Dragon Age 2
                    [Electronic Arts 2011] player who posted on BioWare’s social forum, lamenting
                    vehemently over the video game designer’s choice to make the game so appealing
                    to women and gays, especially when he believes that female and queer gamers
                    occupy less than 10 percent of the entire gaming population. In less than 12
                    hours, his first thread received 420 replies. The criticism of the inclusive
                    game design in the Dragon Age series continued,
                    however. Three years later, in June 2014, five months before the sequel, Dragon Age: Inquisition
                    [Electronic Arts 2014a], was released, another thread regarding the proposed
                    romance dynamics in the upcoming game and its frightful marginalizing
                    homosexuality was created by a player under the name of “Duncaaaaaan”:
                        I am white, straight, and male. Are you upset by this,
                            bioware? [sic] Am I wrong for being white and straight and male? No, of
                            course not, I didn't ask to be born this way and to insult somebody for
                            their race, gender and orientation is extremely bigoted. … It looks to
                            me that bioware [sic] is trying to marginalize core gamers (men in their
                            late teens and beyond) in favour of getting the support of the LGBT
                            community and women, in regards to the character design and
                            story.
                         [Duncaaaaan 2014]
                    

 In less than three hours, the thread received 121 replies. The continued
                    criticism of major video game companies and their inclusion of
                    non-heteronormative practices reflect a resistance toward game designs that
                    challenge traditional gender roles and beliefs and attitudes toward sexual
                    orientations. This article examines the character creation designs of digital
                    narratives from a queer narratological perspective to propose that character
                    creation mechanics can situate the player in an environment where
                    heteronormativity is marginalized in favor of a poststructuralist understanding
                    of gender and sexuality, where players are given the freedom to explore their
                    gender and sexual identities.

                3
In digital narratives, the ability to play as multiple gender or sexual
                    identities has been seen as the liberation from an essentialist sexed body [Nguyen 2003], evidence of inclusion by video game companies [Condis 2015] or even an instance of sexuality blindness [Greer 2013]. But the narrative techniques and narratological
                    ideologies that underpin the relationship between sexuality and digital
                    narratives have rarely been studied. To study how digital narratives allow for
                    the exploration of the player’s gender and sexual identities, what exploration
                    is in cyberspace is first established. This is achieved by a review of how
                    identity tourism as a cybercultural construct has been discussed and can be
                    adapted to an understanding of exploration. The requirements for exploration to
                    occur in digital narratives are explicated. Then, the character creation
                    mechanics of two digital narratives in the form of a role-playing game (RPG),
                        Always Sometimes Monsters
                    [Vagabond Dog 2014], and visual novel, Hustle
                        Cat
                    [DateNighto 2016] are presented, and an analysis is offered on how
                    their designs allow for an exploration of gender identities and confront players
                    with multiple, conflicting sexual identities through the emergent non-linearity
                    and parallelism of plot structures. Subsequently, in light of the recent “Gender Customization Options” update to The Sims 4
                    [Electronic Arts 2014b], the changes in attitudes toward gender as reflected by
                    the modifications of character creation functions throughout the Sims franchise are discussed. The transgressive gender
                    and sexuality configurations produced by the designs of the digital narratives
                    are related to Hélène Cixous’s “other bisexuality” to
                    defend against claims of sexuality blindness or a downplaying of the experiences
                    of members of the queer community.

                4
Before proceeding, the specific usage of certain terms in this article — namely
                    sex, gender, gender identity and sexual identity — must first be clarified.
                    Adapted from GLAAD [GLAAD 2011] and the American Psychological
                    Association [American Psychological Association 2016], briefly, sex is viewed as more
                    biologically determined than gender, gender identity is understood to be an
                    experienced self that may or may not be different from the assigned sex, and
                    sexual identity is regarded as an orientation or sexual preference typically
                    toward a class of sex.[2] Throughout this article, the reader, player and main
                    character of each narrative will be referred to in the third person because at
                    the heart of the argument in this article lies the conviction that within the
                    digital narrative environment, the reader, the player and main characters’
                    genders (and consequently sexualities) are made fluid by narratives that disturb
                    gender binaries.

                5
Research on on-screen bodies and their reaction with the interactor’s gender and
                    sexual identities has predominantly been involved with multi-user dungeons or
                    MUDs. These are typically text-based virtual worlds, where users engage in
                    synchronous interaction with other users and the virtual environment. Lisa
                    Nakamura [Nakamura 1995] discusses “netsex” practices by white males who use Asian stereotypes in their
                    online fantasies. Gender and MUDs have been studied extensively [Fanderclai 1996]
                    [Kendall 1996], and the features of MUDs that gave people over the
                    internet a chance to interact with new textual realities have been thoroughly
                    examined. Sherry Turkle’s [Turkle 1995] book-long study and
                    Shannon McRae’s [McRae 1996] essay discuss the sexual experiences
                    and thoughts regarding gender and sexuality from interviews with users of MUDs.
                    The detailed qualitative data from both studies suggest that, having explored in
                    the virtual world of the MUD, users found their conceptions about themselves or
                    how sexuality works changed. 

                6
That the complicated depth of the virtual world of MUDs can be an environment
                    where users can explore their identities is not being contested. However,
                    membership in the online MUD community has declined. On 9 September 2017, I
                    visited one of the major MUDs, LambdaMOO, and found
                    that there was little activity — there were a total of 56 players, and only 7 of
                    which were marked as recently active. Research on digital media and sexual
                    experimentation and orientation need to now consider forms of more accessible
                    media. Both Turkle [Turkle 1995] and McRae [McRae 1996] acknowledge that people who wish to enter an MUD need
                    some basic knowledge of coding or at least a willingness to learn it. That
                    digital narratives in the form of video games are much easier to install, engage
                    with and disseminate realize and amplify their exploratory function as a greater
                    gaming audience is reached. One of the key outcomes of the proliferation and
                    increased consumption of gaming content that encourages exploration is that the
                    needs of the traditional gamer demographic will be revised for the previously
                    marginalized gaming community. This will become even more evident as video game
                    companies begin to recognize that “even heterosexual, traditionally gendered gamers may
                            want to play with sexuality and gender in video games”
                         [Shaw 2009, 239]. Further, unlike single-player video games, the sexual encounters on MUDs
                    occur between players, and without any other players online to interact with,
                    experimentation would not be possible — which becomes problematic given the
                    declining MUD community. One of the primary differences between MUDs and the
                    video games studied in this article is that MUDs are more reliant on other
                    players than the author-created environment to form a narrative. In the digital
                    narratives discussed here, interaction with other players in-game is either
                    optional or impossible. Experimentation with gender identities and sexuality in
                    video games is studied as a result of the interaction between the player and a
                    more pre-determined narrative structure and environment.

                7
From Janet Murray’s [Murray 1998] endorsement of a narratological
                    approach to video games to Gonzalo Frasca’s [Frasca 2003]
                    introduction of a ludological approach, there has been debate as to which
                    methodology and conceptual framework would be more appropriate for studying
                    video games.[3] This article does not
                    intend to resolve the debate, but introduces yet another lens through which to
                    view video games — a queer narratological approach. Queer narratology was first
                    employed by Susan Lanser [Lanser 1995] in her seminal article,
                        “Sexing the Narrative: Propriety, Desire, and the
                        Engendering of Narratology”, and responds to the lack of attention
                    given to sexuality and queer identities in the study of narrative. She reads
                    Jeanette Winterson’s novel, Written on the Body,
                    and examines the omission of a protagonist’s sex and gender identity as a
                    narrative technique that prompts questions about the relationship between
                    narration and queer representations. The burgeoning discipline has been
                    gradually receiving more attention with Warhol and Lanser's edited collection
                        [Warhol 2015], but it is still evident that more has to be
                    said about how narrative theory and representations of queerness are
                    inextricably related. Mia Consalvo’s [Consalvo 2003] landmark
                    study talks about how non-heteronormative sexualities are presented in the first
                        The Sims
                    [Electronic Arts 2000] game. Her findings, which will be discussed later, can
                    demonstrate the great changes that have happened over a decade after her study
                    to the portrayal of sexualities and gender identities in both The Sims series and other video games.

            

            
                Exploration and Identity Tourism

                8
Lisa Nakamura’s [Nakamura 1995] identity tourism is where the
                    conceptualization of exploration in a digital context comes from. She first used
                    it as a metaphor “to describe the activity of racial
                        identity appropriation, or ‘passing’ in cyberspace”. Terms such
                    as “passing” or “identity tourism” have been used predominantly in
                    discussions of racial identity, and in American history, passing is associated
                    with a “discourse of racial difference and especially with the
                            assumption of a fraudulent ‘white’ identity by an individual
                            culturally and legally defined as ‘Negro’ or black”
                         [Ginsberg 1996, 3]. Nakamura [Nakamura 2008, 1675] notes that identity
                    tourism is often performed by men who seek “netsex”
                    and can be a process by which “users
                            ‘wear’ racially stereotyped avatars without feeling
                        racist”. If we refer to this as racial identity tourism, gender and
                    sexual identity tourism is the act of wearing different avatars of varying
                    gender identities and sexualities. While racial identity tourism has been
                    understood in a negative light, Mimi Nguyen [Nguyen 2003, 288] has adapted the term to sexual identities to show its transgressive
                    capabilities. She argues that sexual identity tourism renders the digital space
                    into a “liberatory space, disrupting the social determinism
                        of the body from the identifications of the self”, where genders and
                    sexualities can be constructed and reconstructed by players at will through, for
                    example, character creation. Nguyen contributes to the already robust discussion
                    of how the digital space achieves poststructuralist philosophies of gender and
                    sexuality, but the exploratory element of identity tourism, ironically, has not
                    received much attention. In a study of users’ experiences on online MUDs,
                    Shannon McRae [McRae 1996, 249] notes that gender swapping in
                    virtual space can be “motivated by a sense of
                        self-exploration, to see what sex is like from a different point of
                        view”. Through this process, she continues, “we can experience for ourselves, inside ourselves, the
                            kinds of things that we associate with female or male, and realize that
                            those aspects are not, after all, something Other and outside of
                            us”
                         [McRae 1996, 253]. This act of exploring by “identity
                        touristing” with the possibility of discovering things previously
                    unknown about the self forms the understanding of exploration in this
                    article.

                9
Nakamura’s metaphor of “wearing” an avatar is a
                    starting point for discussing how the exploration happens as a product of
                    identity tourism. However, I argue that the metaphor is insufficient to explain
                    exploration because exploration is an introspective process that requires
                    players to go beyond wearing other identities to being
                    other identities. There must be a temporary adoption of the digital body’s
                    identity (the digital body as the avatar or player-controlled character) by the
                    real body such that the experience of the digital body can be internalized by
                    the real body and thus modify players’ conceptions of themselves. Agency in a
                    digital narrative has been seen as what combines the real body and the digital
                    body on-screen. Katherine Hayles [Hayles 2008, 17] offers a
                    description of this agency as the alternation between “top-down approach to narrative in which the narrator spins a story, and the
                        bottom-up model of interactivity in which the user chooses how the story
                        will be told”. This alternation forms what Dovey and Kennedy [Dovey 2006, 109] would refer to as the “cybernetic loop”, that which makes it so that the “player and the game are inseparable for the duration of the
                        game” and transforms the real body of the player into a cyborg,
                        “a subjectivity that depends precisely on this collapse
                        of boundary between the human and the machine”. However, how it is
                    that players can adopt the identity of their character or avatar
                    must also be addressed.

                10
If a player is to experience a merge between the identities, then the player must
                        believe that such a merge can happen. Concepts such as
                    immersion, what Janet Murray [Murray 1998, 98] terms the
                        “sensation of being surrounded by a completely other
                        reality”, Roland Barthes’s [Barthes 1989]
                    “the reality effect”, and realism in general are
                    related to whether this belief is possible. The crux of this issue is, however,
                    whether players can believe that they are an Italian plumber called Mario trying
                    to save Princess Peach of Mushroom Kingdom. Despite the sometimes large
                    physical, psychological, or mental differences between the real body and the
                    digital body, the player can comfortably negotiate these distances and assume
                    the identity of a digital persona. Katherine Angel Cross [Angel Cross 2012] has cited pretend play, role playing, and
                    imagination as processes that occur when someone takes on a digital identity,
                    but Peter J. Rabinowitz’s [Rabinowitz 1977, 126–134] analysis
                    of narratological audiences provides a more structural approach to this
                    phenomenon. Rabinowitz states that there are four audiences: (1) actual audience
                    — the flesh-and-blood person who reads; (2) authorial audience — the
                    hypothetical reader for whom the author writes; (3) narrative audience — the
                    audience that accepts the fictional world in which the story happens; and (4)
                    ideal narrative audience — the audience by which the narrator, not the author,
                    wishes to be read. Only when players are able to become the appropriate
                    narrative audience — those willing to accept a reality in which they are
                    occupants in a digital, fictional world for the duration of the narrative — can
                    their players adopt the identities of their digital bodies. When the digital
                    body or world is so incompatible with the norms of players that they cannot or
                    refuse to believe they can adopt the identity of their digital body, their role
                    is then more like that of a voyeur controlling and observing an on-screen
                    subject. Pretend play, role play or imagination are then processes by which
                    Rabinowitz’s narrative audience is adopted. Unless players come to change their
                    mind about their digital presence or world, exploration cannot occur because
                    then the distance between the player and their avatar or character becomes so
                    great that the player is not “being” or even
                        “wearing” any digital identity.

                11
The ability to create a character in digital narratives cements the relationship
                    between the players and their digital bodies. Catherine Gallagher [Gallagher 2006, 351] makes some noteworthy observations about
                    the fictionality of characters in novels and the emotional attachment between
                    the character and the reader. Readers are attached to fictional characters not
                    in spite of their fictionality but precisely because of it — the fictional
                    setting establishes “a protected affective enclosure that
                        [encourages] risk-free emotional investment”. That the personality
                    exists only in the boundaries of the narrative without “extratextual baggage” means that the reader can be immersed in the
                    experience, identifying with and investing in only the presented individuals. A
                    character’s “peculiar affective force”, Gallagher
                    proposes, “is generated by the mutual implication of their unreal
                            knowability and their apparent depth, the link between their real
                            nonexistence and the reader’s experience of them as deeply and
                            impossibly familiar”
                         [Gallagher 2006, 356–357]. Gallagher is primarily referring to characters in novels, but the
                    players in creating their characters in digital narratives would seem to
                    strengthen their bonds toward them. First, by creating a character, one is
                    effectively responsible for its existence. In novels, according to Mieke Bal’s
                    character effect, the illusion of an identity is created. This identity is
                    conceivable only on the textual level as represented by the author. In digital
                    narratives, the character created is a product of both the agency of the player
                    and the author’s systems and rules so that the impenetrability of a character in
                    a novel is less applicable to a character in an electronic setting in which
                    players contribute to the presence of their on-screen personality.
                    The players personalize their characters in a way that renders them knowable
                    only to the players themselves, and the imaginary status of a character is no
                    longer imaginary because the players are able to identify parts of their
                    characters’ being as originating from themselves. This relationship between the
                    character and its creator helps situate the player within the narrative
                    audience, and the exploration of one’s identity can be seen as a capitalization
                    on the cyborgian inseparability of players and their creations.

            

            
                Exploring in Queer Worlds: Always Sometimes
                        Monsters and Hustle Cat

                12
Always Sometimes Monsters (henceforth ASM) was released in May 2014 by Vagabond Dog and has
                    since received over 1,000 reviews on Steam, most of which were “very positive”, and awards for Best Writing and Best
                    Indie Game from the Canadian Videogame Awards in 2014 [Valve Corporation 2017a]. The narrative starts with a brief
                    introductory sequence, after which there is a scene at a party where the player
                    selects the characters. Then, the game progresses one year in game time, and the
                    protagonist is shown to be living a life in squalor because of career issues
                    and, most importantly, because they broke up with their partner. The protagonist
                    receives an invitation to a wedding between this partner and someone else, and
                    the main conflict of the narrative and objective of the game is presented — the
                    protagonist must survive and pass through two cities to reach the wedding
                    ceremony to win their lover back with little funds to spare. Depending on the
                    players’ choices, and assuming that their character survives, they are either
                    successful or unsuccessful in stopping the wedding and getting back with their
                    partner.

                13
Character creation in ASM happens in the party
                    scene, where players control the host of the party and talk to the partygoers.
                    Whomever players make the host talk to becomes their avatar. 
                        
                        [image: ]
                    Figure 1. 
Screenshot of the scene where the player selects a character. Circled
                            in red is the host that is controlled. Taken on May 19, 2016.

 Most of the characters seen in Figure 1,
                    besides the host, can be chosen to be the protagonist. After this selection
                    process, the player controls the protagonist and goes out onto the patio where
                    the lover of the protagonist can be selected. 
                        
                        [image: ]
                    Figure 2. 
Screenshot of the scene where players select the lover of their
                            protagonist. Circled in red is the character that has been taken control
                            of. Taken on May 19, 2016.

 Again, most of the characters in Figure
                        2 can be selected as the protagonist’s lover, and after this the
                    player gives the protagonist and their lover names. The player is free to select
                    whatever sex the protagonist or the lover is but, at this point, the expressed
                    gender always corresponds to the assigned sex.

                14
Research on the player’s freedom to choose an avatar’s sex or gender has
                    discussed this as some form of resistance against the privileged, straight white
                    male gamer, or as a step toward a liberal feminist philosophy. Nielsen [Nielsen 2015, 49] argues that in some RPGs when the
                    characters’ sex or sexuality “does not directly hinder
                        characters’ abilities in the game world”, the design of the game
                    conforms to a liberal feminist ideology. This understanding of sex and gender
                    presupposes that gender identities are stable. Perhaps this is because, in
                    scholarship on video games, character creation is seen as a gameplay element
                    that occupies typically the starting sequences of a game, and characters’ sex
                    and gender are understood as subsequently fixed throughout the rest of the game.
                    However, each playable character in ASM is a tabula
                    rasa distinguishable only by the appearance of their avatar, and the choices the
                    player makes to modify this character throughout the narrative reminds us that
                    character creation or characterization is a continuous process. It was mentioned
                    that the expressed gender in ASM corresponds to the
                    assigned sex; however, in the final sequence of the game, the wedding ceremony
                    scene, the protagonist is able to have a conversation with a transgender
                    character. This character asks the protagonist a question about their views on
                    gender identity, to which the protagonist may respond that they are transgender,
                    their lover is transgender, they “find it gross” or
                    they are “fine with it”. The answer to this question
                    does not affect the plot but can affect players’ conception of their
                    protagonist’s gender identity both retroactively and for every future
                    read-through of the narrative. The introduction of a transgender identity
                    distinguishes sex from gender identities and provides players with the
                    opportunity to explore the gender identities generated from a permutation of
                    assigned sexes and experienced genders in a digital narrative. Gender identities
                    and characterization in general in digital narratives should be recognized as
                    fluid and continuously shaped by the narrative and the decisions made by players
                    if the full potential of exploration and identity tourism is to be examined.

                15
Hustle Cat was released in March 2016 by DateNighto
                    and has garnered 360 reviews on Steam, with an overall rating of “very positive”
                         [Valve Corporation 2017b]. Although it is an RPG, classifying it as a visual novel (not to be
                    confused with the graphic novel) would be more accurate. The visual novel
                    originated in Japan [Cavallaro 2010] but the manga/anime art style
                    seen predominantly in this genre has been adapted by Western cultures, as in
                        Hustle Cat; though there has been little
                    academic attention to this genre. Lebowitz and Klug [Lebowitz 2011, 193] argue that “only a handful of visual novels
                        have been released outside the country”, but the genre is in fact
                    quickly gaining popularity outside of Japan. On Steam, there are over 700 games
                    with a “Visual Novel” tag [Valve Corporation 2017d]. Lebowitz
                    and Klug [Lebowitz 2011, 194] state that it is similar to the
                    choose-your-own-adventure style of narrative and that, most importantly, “they don’t face the length restrictions found in physical
                        books”. The large amount of branches and complex plots in visual
                    novels require large word counts that are more easily achievable with a digital
                    medium. In Marie-Laure Ryan’s [Ryan 2009] terms, the visual novel,
                    would be considered a “playable story” rather than a
                        “narrative game”, but the visual novel, as a
                    digital product, is composed of more complex non-linear plots, gameplay
                    functions and audio-visual elements. In the visual novel, the reader is told the
                    narrative predominantly through text and there are junctions in the narrative
                    where the player must decide which option to choose (see Figure 3). The route and endings change according to the choices.
                        
                        
                        [image: ]
                    Figure 3. 
Screenshot of a narrative junction in Hustle
                                Cat. Taken on May 19, 2016.

 The protagonist of Hustle Cat is Avery
                    Grey, a young adult who takes a job at a cat café. It turns out that the café is
                    cursed by a spell that turns all its employees into cats when they leave the
                    café. How Avery breaks the curse for the employees at the café is the main
                    storyline. If Avery does not die, Avery always ends up with one of the
                    bachelors/bachelorettes at the café. As in many visual novels, experiencing how
                    the romance plays out with each of the bachelors/bachelorettes is one of the
                    main goals a reader has when approaching the narrative.

                16
Creating a character in Hustle Cat is restricted to
                    choosing what gender the character should be referred to as (Figure 4) and what picture image they have (Figure 5). 
                        
                        [image: ]
                    Figure 4. 
Screenshot of character creation screen in Hustle
                                Cat. Taken on May 19, 2016.


                    
                        
                        [image: ]
                    Figure 5. 
Screenshots from Hustle Cat of possible
                            portraits (below). The images during the main narrative (top) correspond
                            to the circled portraits. Taken on May 19, 2016.

 Although it is not made explicit, the portraits the reader may choose
                    from in Figure 5 suggest the choice of the
                    character’s sex. Physical features associated with a stereotypically female
                    body, long hair, breasts and skinnier arms, appear in the “female” version
                    of the character.

                17
Even though it is ambiguous as to whether the sex of the character can be chosen,
                    it is clear that there is a distinction between physical appearance and
                    expressed gender identity. This is executed more explicitly than it is in ASM, and the rare inclusion of the third-person
                    pronouns to refer to the protagonist in a digital narrative establishes the
                    equality of the multiple gender identities. Whereas from a feminist
                    narratological perspective, Ruth E. Page [Page 2006, 29]
                    argues that “ambiguous characterization [challenges] the
                        reader’s notion of gender as a stable, defining feature of a character’s
                        identity”, in this case the reverse is true. The unambiguous
                    assignment of a character’s expressed identity, which may or may not differ from
                    their physical appearance, makes it explicit that a notion of stable binary
                    gender identities is incongruous with the design of this digital narrative. The
                    ability to mix and match sexed bodies and gender identities is what allows the
                    reader to explore how each combination elicits a different response toward their
                    own conception of gender identities. Further, upon closer inspection of Figure 4, underneath the selection of pronouns, it
                    reads “You can change this mid-game if you like”.
                    While reading Hustle Cat, the reader can open the
                    options menu to change what pronoun they would like their character to be
                    referred to. From a game design point of view, switching pronouns is not
                    difficult because of the text-based nature of the visual novel. However, the
                    effortlessness of changing the character’s expressed gender on the reader’s part
                    makes Hustle Cat the epitome of a digital narrative
                    that encourages exploration of gender identities. Even when the reader does not
                    wish to change pronouns, the knowledge that they can always do so throughout the
                    narrative continuously asks readers whether they are comfortable with the gender
                    identity they experience on-screen. Not answering this question is in itself a
                    response that reaffirms one’s current gender identity. It is from this
                    question-and-answer feedback loop that the exploration of gender identities can
                    occur.

                18
How character creation allows for the exploration of gender identities has been
                    discussed as predominantly the result of readers’ ability to adopt an array of
                    gender identities. When gender identity is not fixed, however, sexual
                    orientation cannot be fixed as well. How character creation mechanics, in
                    creating parallel worlds and influencing the temporality of the plot, confronts
                    the reader with multiple sexual identities is now examined.

                19
Susan Lanser’s [Lanser 1995] study, “Sexing the
                        Narrative”, as mentioned earlier, reads Jeanette Winterson’s Written on the Body from a queer narratological
                    perspective. Lanser contends that the protagonist of the novel being unsexed and
                    ungendered produces two major outcomes. First, the reader cannot assign a gender
                    to the protagonist so that they are straight because the protagonist has
                    romantic experiences with both men and women, and thus the reader is always
                    confronted with queerness in the novel. Second, narrative tension from the
                    ambiguity of the protagonist’s sex and gender is created, and she uses as an
                    example of this a scene where the protagonist is in a fight with a male. While
                    an analysis of narrative tension would be interesting, in terms of examining the
                    exploration of sexual identities, understanding how the reader is confronted
                    with queerness is more helpful.

                20
Those who engage with ASM and Hustle Cat are confronted with queer identities from the beginning
                    of the character creation process to the end of the narrative. Whether readers
                    choose to create an identity that is queer or not does not matter, but the
                    design of the digital narrative and the resultant ability to play as queer
                    already situates the reader in an environment of fluid sexual identities. An
                    examination of the parallel/possible worlds and temporality of the digital
                    narrative can demonstrate this. Although to summarize her entire description of
                    these theories would take too long, Marie-Laure Ryan [Ryan 2006, 669] notes there are two major types of possible worlds, actual or
                    non-actual. She says, “In a story with multiple branches,
                        the world shown by the current branch is the only actual one;
                        the others are just nonactualized possibilities” (original italics).
                    In other words, the world created by the reader’s active involvement and shown
                    to the reader is the actual world. She further argues that “the branches not chosen become counterfactual and usually disappear from
                        the readers’ minds until they start all over again … and the branches passed
                        over no longer matter”. It could be argued that in a hypertext novel,
                    those as complicated as Shelley Jackson’s “Patchwork
                        Girl”, it is extremely cognitively taxing for the reader to keep
                    track of all the choices they could have made, but the branches passed over do,
                    in fact, matter and they can have an effect on the reader’s mind.

                21
The queer effect of these parallel worlds or universes on a reader is created by
                    the experienced temporality in a digital narrative. Two notions of time in
                    digital narrative are used here. First, “gameworld
                        time”, which is “established by the set of events taking place within
                            the represented gameworld”
                         [Zagal 2010]. Second, Mieke Bal’s [Bal 1985, 39] understanding of a
                    duration of time in a narrative as “moments of
                        crisis”, moments when “in a brief instant of
                        time, the life of persons or an entire nation takes a decisive turn”.
                    Though the outcomes of each read-through may be different, each narrative is
                    grounded in the same crisis — winning your lover back in ASM and undoing the curse from the cat café in Hustle Cat — and the gameworld time becomes bound to the crisis in
                    each read-through. If the lover in ASM is getting
                    married to the protagonist’s rival in one read-through, and in another
                    read-through the lover is leaving the rival for the protagonist, because these
                    events take place in the same gameworld time and moment of crisis, the only
                    logical explanation is that these two events are occurring concurrently in two
                    separate possible worlds. Each digital narrative is then a sum of its parallel
                    worlds, all of which conflict with each other but are of equal validity. Thus,
                    even if a player attempts to select or create “nonqueer” avatars by
                    selecting, for example, a male protagonist and a female lover in ASM, these same avatars start off queer. The design of
                    the narrative necessitates that, at the same fictional time of the narrative,
                    the avatars are romantically engaged with avatars of different sexes and genders
                    in other universes. By default, each character must then possess every quality
                    within the limits of the digital narrative so that the player can choose which
                    one to experience in a particular read-through. The player is confronted with
                    the fact that, “[i]n virtual reality, mind and body, female and male,
                            gay and straight don’t seem to be such natural oppositions anymore, or
                            even natural categories to assign to people”
                         [McRae 1996, 249], and where multiple, fluid sexual identities are the norm becomes the
                    environment in which players explore.

                22
The conclusion that all of the possible actual or non-actual worlds in ASM and Hustle Cat do not
                    inhabit protagonists and love interests with heterosexual sexual identities
                    rests on two premises: first, that there is nothing in the narrative that can
                    confirm the heterosexuality of the protagonist;[4] and second, that protagonists can be
                    attracted to either sex, and particularly in ASM, a
                    transgender character. Without the narrative marker of sexuality that Lanser
                        [Lanser 1995] describes, the multiple sexualities possible in
                    a single character should only exhibit queerness. There is, however, a
                    possibility that the queerness is not fully experienced. If digital narratives
                    might make people imagine “the concept of changing
                            bodies/identities/genders”
                         [Angel Cross 2012, 80], the structured polysemy that Katherine Sender [Sender 1999] describes, that the same message produces different meanings based on one’s
                    social background and beliefs, presents a possibility that straight people
                    imagine strictly straight worlds. To a part of the narrative audience who
                    refuses to accept that queer sexualities are in the narrative, the queer
                    characters in non-actualized worlds remain marginalized or do not exist because
                    the worlds in which queer characters play a role in the narrative are so
                    incongruous with the player’s norms. The power to explore gender and sexual
                    identities becomes hindered. Although this could be an issue in ASM, for Hustle Cat this
                    is not the case.

                23
The main objective in ASM is to survive and stop the
                    wedding ceremony to get back with the lover, but, as with any novel, digital or
                    otherwise, the goal of Hustle Cat is to master the
                    narrative, to finish reading and to understand the whole story. While in a
                    hypertext novel, as Robert Selig [Selig 2000] notes with Stuart
                    Moulthrop’s “Victory Garden”, to go through every
                    combination of lexias is implausible, the mastery of the text is possible in the
                    more manageable narrative space of a visual novel. In Hustle Cat, there are six major routes the reader can go through,
                    and in each one the protagonist romances one bachelor/bachelorette. However, one
                    of these bachelors, Graves, is unlocked only after all the routes with other
                    characters have been completed. It is in this route that the backstory of the
                    curse is revealed. Thus, if readers are to fully understand the story and master
                    the text, they must go through every route and, in doing so, their protagonist
                    must experience romances with both males and females. Although the reader may
                    choose the sexes and genders that retain the illusion of heterosexuality, some
                    of the characters, such as Graves and Mason (a bachelorette), are revealed as
                    having queer relationships in the past and when readers must be romantically
                    involved with these two characters, they are reminded that no complete reading
                    of Hustle Cat can avoid interaction with queer
                    identities. Hustle Cat allows readers to explore
                    sexuality in a digital environment where queerness is the only constant, forcing
                    its readers to either adopt queer identities or actively engage with the lives
                    of its queer characters.

                24
The ability to explore one’s gender and sexuality in these two digital narratives
                    has been shown to be primarily based on the ability for its players and readers
                    to choose both the protagonist and a love interest’s sex and/or gender. This
                    freedom opens up permutations of sexes, genders and sexualities that are
                    unavoidable because in every play-through, regardless of whether a
                    heteronormative configuration of characters is chosen, the temporally parallel
                    structure of all the possible actual and non-actual worlds forces the player to
                    experience the narrative in a game system in which all the player-controlled
                    protagonists in the narrative are of all possible genders and sexual
                    orientations. Each player is thus confronted with the knowledge that the gender
                    and sexual identities of their on-screen presence can never be fully stable. The
                    inclusion of queer characters other than the player-controlled ones in the game
                    environment further force players to engage with non-heteronormative identities
                    in order to progress through the narrative. It is not only indie digital
                    narratives such as ASM and Hustle Cat that employ this “queer worlds” approach to
                    narrative construction and game design. In the following section, progressive
                    character creation designs in The Sims series, and
                    especially its latest sequel, The Sims 4, are
                    analyzed.

            

            
                The Sims, One through Four

                25
Every four to five years, beginning in 2000, Electronic Arts has released a new
                    sequel to its critically acclaimed and often-studied life-simulation series,
                        The Sims
                    [Electronic Arts 2000]. In 2014, the latest game in the series, The Sims 4
                    [Electronic Arts 2014b], was released and was named the most sold game in both
                    2014 and 2015 by the Entertainment Software Association [Entertainment Software Association 2015]
                    [Entertainment Software Association 2016]. For many reasons, it has been and still is mentioned
                    in many video game studies. The first game, which became popular soon after its
                    release, drew attention to the simulation genre in video games. Mia Consalvo in
                    2003 [Consalvo 2003, 181] called it “perhaps the most progressive game yet released concerning sexuality, making
                        it a good candidate for study”. Not many substantial changes
                    regarding sexuality were made to the series in the years following the first
                    game in the series, but with the newest update in the latest addition,
                    Electronic Arts may have reclaimed the title that Consalvo gave it over a decade
                    ago.

                26
In the first game of the series, Create-A-Sim (the name of the character creation
                    process in the game) is a simple matter of choosing between a few options. The
                    name, the age, the race, and the appearance of the Sim (the name of a character
                    or “person” in the game) can be decided by the player. The
                    Sim is either male or female. The player may allocate “points” to different
                    traits a Sim may have. A created Sim or group of Sims is always referred to as a
                    family; however, as Consalvo [Consalvo 2003] notes, the player is
                    reminded in the game manual, by its illustrations of heterosexual couples and by
                    its statement that only heterosexual couples may have children, that there are
                    certain restrictions to homosexual romance. Marriage is only allowed for
                    heterosexual couples, while sex or “playing in bed” is
                    permitted to both homosexual and heterosexual couples.[5] Any family of Sim adults can adopt a baby, and Sims may
                    receive a phone call when adoption is possible, though this happens randomly and
                    is out of the player’s control. From The Sims 2
                    [Electronic Arts 2004] onward, restrictions on homosexual Sims are lifted.
                    Marriage becomes an option for gay Sims, though it is called a “joined
                        union” until The Sims 3
                    [Electronic Arts 2009] where it is then referred to as marriage. Adopting a
                    child is possible from the second game in the series for Sims hetero-, homo- or
                    bisexual, and they can call adoption agencies directly to arrange this. In the
                    third installation, “family” is no longer used to describe a group of Sims
                    that live on the same lot but “household” is used. Character creation
                    mechanics remain largely unchanged except that each subsequent game allows for
                    more customization of, for example, hair styles, clothes and make up. The size
                    of a female Sim’s breasts is made modifiable in The Sims
                        3.

                27
When the latest game in the series, The Sims 4, was
                    first released, it had character creation options very similar to the previous
                    game. Electronic Arts in their marketing of the game emphasized that Sims now
                    had “emotions,” which are indicated to the player in terms
                    such as happy, flirty or depressed. On 2 June 2016, however, two years following
                    the initial release of the game, major changes to the customization of sex and
                    gender in the character creation system were introduced. Players now first
                    choose the Sim’s sex, which is either male or female. The following additional
                    four choices are given to the player when creating a Sim. 	Physical frame:	Masculine
	Feminine



	Clothing preference:	Masculine
	Feminine



	Pregnancy:	This Sim can become pregnant
	This Sim can impregnate
	Neither of the above



	Toilet options:	This Sim can use the toilet standing
	This Sim can only use the toilet sitting down




 The physical frame of a Sim refers to aspects of their body, such as
                    their bone structure or muscle tone. Clothing preference is an option more for
                    convenience and decides what clothes are presented to players when selecting
                    their Sim’s attire, so that a Sim who prefers “feminine”
                    clothing will be shown those clothes and not “masculine”
                    clothing. Sims games previously only allowed
                        “masculine” clothes to be worn by male-sexed Sims and
                        “feminine” clothes for female-sexed Sims. Traditionally,
                    Sims of the female sex are the only ones who can be impregnated by having sex,
                    whereas those of the male sex, if they are abducted by aliens, can become
                    pregnant with alien offspring, which is not possible for female-sexed Sims.
                    Male-sexed Sims used to be the only ones who could impregnate. Pregnancy options
                    revamp this design and lift restrictions applied to the biological sexes. Toilet
                    options can be configured so that the animation of a Sim using the toilet
                    reflects the choice the player makes. After the initial Create-A-Sim sequence,
                    players may click on a wardrobe to change these aspects about their Sim again if
                    they wish to do so.

                28
While the masculine/feminine distinction used to describe the clothing in the
                    game can be seen as problematic, because it still presupposes an essentialist
                    configuration between clothing and sex, it could be argued that if no
                    distinction was made between “masculine/feminine” fashion, every time a
                    player clicks on clothing options, both types of clothes would appear, which
                    could lead to longer load times and confusion on the player’s part. Placing
                        “stereotypically” in front of terms could resolve this, but the new
                    options given to the player more than makes up for this little shortcoming.
                    Avoiding the oversimplistic conclusion that the game in offering the player such
                    freedoms is in some way liberatory, the character creation design can be first
                    approached from a feminist software design perspective. Feminist software
                    design, says Justine Cassell [Cassell 2000, 304–305], adheres
                    to the following tenets: 	Transfer design authority to the user
	Value subjective and experiental [sic] knowledge in the context of computer use
	Allow use by many different kinds of users in different
                            contexts
	Give the user a tool to express her voice and the truth of her
                            existence
	Encourage collaboration among users

 In the previous section on ASM and Hustle Cat, the emphasis was on how players’
                    subjective and experiential knowledge of themselves and the truth of their
                    existence are uncovered when design authority is transferred to the user by
                    creating a character. In the later installations of the Sims series, Electronic Arts created collaborative platforms on
                    which a community of “Simmers” can be formed. For The Sims 3, Electronic Arts [Electronic Arts n.d.]
                    created a site called “The Exchange” to encourage
                    players to share the Sims and buildings they had created in the game. The Sims 4 uses a “Gallery”
                    in-game where players can directly download others’ creations or upload their
                    own. In under a year of the game’s release, over 92 million Sims were created in
                        The Sims 4 
                    [Franklin 2015]. The many discussion forum sites both created by
                    Electronic Arts and fans of the game encourage collaboration among and the
                    participation of players. The addition of the new gender customization options
                    allows players to share created Sims whose identities are explicitly queer so
                    that the feminist game design in the previous games is now also a queer game
                    design in that it promotes the explicit expression of the experiences and
                    subjectivities of players of varying gender and sexual identities.

                29
The queer worlds approach used in the previous section is applicable to The Sims 4 in that it could be conceived by the player
                    that a Sim is always inherently bisexual because Sims are able to romance a Sim
                    of any sex or gender. However, referring back to Sender’s [Sender 1999] structured polysemy, players can imagine or perceive
                    a heteronormative gameworld very easily because the vast freedom given to
                    players in a Sims game makes the narrative produced
                    emergent. Tinsley Galyean [Galyean 1995, 1] on emergent
                    narratives says, “We all construct narratives out of our
                        daily activities to help us remember, understand, categorize and share
                        experiences. … If any narrative structure (or story) emerges it is a product
                        of our interactions and goals as we navigate the experience”. In a
                        Sims game there are no prewritten narratives
                    like there are in ASM or Hustle Cat. There is no identifiable moment of crisis that can
                    corner the player into recognizing each subsequent play-through of the game as
                    part of a universe of parallel worlds. In this case, it is the sudden overhaul
                    of the game’s character creation mechanics that “queer” the game. It is the
                    fact that the most popular computer game of 2014 and 2015 has been updated to
                    include transgenderism and a greater range of queer options that demonstrates a
                    recognition of queer gamers by the video gaming industry. The trend in attitudes
                    towards sex and gender in the Sims series that
                    favors progressive and inclusive game designs forces its players to come to
                    terms with the fact that future games in the series will continue developing to
                    recognize queer identities.

                30
The exploratory element in The Sims 4 can be seen
                    from the play style that the design of the game encourages. Consalvo [Consalvo 2003, 189] argues that in The
                        Sims, “the player does not take on the
                            ‘identity’ of any one character in particular, but is expected to
                        create and manage multiple characters. … In The
                            Sims, players can control any character they desire, by quickly
                        switching among them and by zooming into and out of different
                    houses”. Although in the newer games, the player often controls a few
                    Sims in a household, and although alternating between a few households is still
                    an option, The Sims 4 encourages a play style in
                    which players attach themselves emotionally to the Sims they create. Major
                    gaming channels on YouTube such as Pewdiepie [Pewdiepie 2014],
                    Jacksepticeye [Jacksepticeye 2014], and DanAndPhilGAMES [DanAndPhilGAMES 2014] have produced “Let’s plays” of The Sims 4 where the video makers have created
                    versions of themselves to play within the game, which demonstrates the more
                    personal approach taken to gameplay as opposed to the “playing god” mode that Consalvo describes. The time and attention a
                    player gives to tweaking their character, which the detailed customization
                    options makes possible, and the goals players hope their Sims can achieve
                    encourage an emotional investment in their characters. The game marketed as that
                    which allows players to play with life lets players explore the world of the
                    Sims through the eyes of the Sims. Richard Walsh [Walsh 2011]
                    contends that the Sims series as simulation and
                    thus representation does not offer a reliable portrayal of real human behavior,
                    which seems to repeat Plato’s dictum in The
                        Republic of art and representation as at a third remove from
                    reality, but this does not impede the player’s ability to internalize on-screen
                    experiences because of the verisimilitude of the systems in the game. The
                    resemblance of the relationships between Sims and gender and sex systems in the
                    gameworld to the experiential world assists players in taking part as the
                    narrative audience of the game — an audience that accepts a reality where they
                    are occupants of this digital world. The result is that players can explore by
                    experimenting with the combinations of sex and gender and sexual identities of
                    the characters they have created and are attached to. It is the combined effects
                    of the encouraged play style and the ease of choosing from a multitude of queer
                    identities that foreground the Sims 4 as a digital
                    narrative that allows for the exploration of one’s identity.

            

            
                Being Sexual Blind, Being “Other Bisexual” and
                    Concluding Remarks

                31
For Stephen Greer [Greer 2013, 16], in his examination of the
                        Fable and Dragon
                        Age video game series, the ability to play as different sexualities
                    without any consequences “presumes an even playfield”
                    and reveals a sexuality blind approach that might “free
                        creators from the burden of attempting to create an extended range of
                        avatars, characters and narrative variations covering multiple
                        configurations”. Greer quotes T. L. Taylor [Taylor 2003, 35], who says the result is that “issues
                        pertaining to gender and race get taken off the table as areas to be
                        articulated, debated, and confronted”. It is possible that the
                    treatment of different sexualities as equal can cause the important issues on
                    this subject to be disregarded, and in a message board on Steam, some players
                    commented on the lack of homophobia in ASM as
                    unrealistic [Valve Corporation 2017c]; and on a popular site that
                    specializes in articles on Sims games, SimsVIP [SimsVIP 2016] comments on the ability for two biologically male
                    Sims to impregnate each other sparked criticism for being anatomically
                    inaccurate. It could even be said that changing a Sim’s sex, gender, or ability
                    to be pregnant mid-game with a click on the wardrobe is unrealistic and does not
                    adequately reflect the psychological and physical challenges a person faces when
                    undergoing operations to change their sex. However, it must be acknowledged that
                    issues relating to sex, gender identity and sexuality, particularly
                    transgenderism, are only beginning to be incorporated into games by major video
                    game companies.

                32
Further, in response to allegations that some inclusive video game designs,
                    because of the conflation of varying sexualities, foster an environment in which
                    important issues regarding sexual identities are ignored, it should first be
                    noted that even the inclusion of queer options in video games was met with
                    uproar, as Megan Condis [Condis 2015] notes, from the “straight male gamer” demographic, thus placing issues
                    of gender and sexuality under the spotlight. The academic reportage of forum
                    threads started by conservative personalities such as Bastal and Duncaaaaaan has
                    revealed the on-going debate on these issues that have taken place simply
                    because game designers have so much as accommodated people outside the
                    privileged heteronormative demographic. In place of the
                    sexuality/gender/transgender-blind approach by some scholars toward the design
                    of video games that encourages an equal treatment of individuals, the emergent
                    transgressive poststructuralist ethos, the idea of “other
                        bisexuality”, should be considered as well. As described in her
                    seminal essay, “The Laugh of the Medusa”, Helénè
                    Cixous’s [Cixous 1976, 884] other bisexuality is: each one’s location in self (répérage en
                            soi) of the presence — variously manifest and insistent
                        according to each person, male or female — of both sexes, non-exclusion
                        either of the difference of one sex, and, from this “self-permission,”
                        multiplication of the effects of the inscription of desire, over all parts
                        of my body and the other body.

 Cixous’s “The
                        Laugh of the Medusa” argued against Sigmund Freud’s “Medusa’s Head”, published in 1922. Whereas Freud saw
                    bisexuality as a merge of masculinity and femininity, Cixous’s “other bisexuality” resists these binaries. She imagines
                    a sexuality that destabilizes traditional dichotomies of male and female,
                    masculinity and femininity — phallogocentric dichotomies where femininity is
                    formed based on what masculinity is not. What results from other bisexuality is “a future when males and females explore the infinite
                            possibilities of their bisexuality, in this world of elsewhere,
                                ‘woman’ will no longer hold us captive, and the either/or of
                            essentialism will be worn out”
                         [Binhammer 1991, 77]. “Other bisexuality” describes desire as flowing infinitely and
                    everywhere, from anyone and to anyone, with no restrictions whatsoever.

                33
Cixous’s essay was also famous for its coinage of écriture
                        féminine, or “feminine writing”, which according to her is
                    where other bisexuality can be experienced. However, the spirit of other
                    bisexuality appears in the discussed digital narratives as well. While it is
                    implicit that characters in ASM or Hustle Cat are sexed as male or female, and it is
                    explicit in the Sims series, these digital
                    narratives design characters as bodies of infinitely variable desires not
                    directed exclusively at any gender or sex, where essentialist configurations of
                    gender and sexual identities collapse. Especially in the queer parallel worlds
                    analysis, where a digital narrative is the culmination of playthroughs or
                    readthroughs with protagonists of all possible sexualities, the limitlessness of
                    experimentation with desire encapsulates the transgression of other bisexuality.
                    In such digital narratives, the progressive poststructuralist understanding
                    trumps the heteronormative categories of genders and sexualities and a
                    destabilized essentialism and unstable identities become the only stable
                    understanding of gender and sexuality. Considering the freedom to choose one’s
                    on-screen identity without consequence as embodying the spirit of other
                    bisexuality rather than being sexuality blind appreciates the transgressive
                    potential and power of the digital narrative. It also recognizes progression of
                    the designs of digital narratives in a direction that promotes the inclusion of
                    a previously marginalized gaming demographic. This is not to say that the
                    shortcomings that a sexuality blind approach uncovers should be ignored, but the
                    digital narrative as a platform where unrestrained, multidirectional libidinal
                    economies can be realized and can be experimented with should be considered as
                    well.

                34
As Jerry Kang [Kang 2000] notes, passing in real life is
                    significantly more difficult than doing so in a digital space — to pass racially
                    in real life, he says, for example, one might need to undergo expensive and
                    dangerous surgery. Digital environments allow for the separation between the
                    experienced self and the expressed self at the click of a button. Sherry Turkle
                        [Turkle 1995, 213] contends that when you choose to swap
                    genders virtually, “you may discover things about yourself
                        that you never knew before … [and] explore conflicts raised by one’s
                        biological gender”. The ability to play as different sexes and have
                    romantic attachments with either sex appeared as early as at the beginning of
                    the Sims series in 2000. However, only recently
                    have digital narrative designs considered that the sex to which one is assigned
                    may differ from the gender identity that one experiences. Even though
                    hypersexualized sex icons continue to appear to cater to the straight male
                    community, as major digital entertainment companies become more aware of the
                    previously marginalized consumers of video games, characters with non-binary
                    gender identities, such as Krem in the widely popular video game, Dragon Age: Inquisition
                    [Electronic Arts 2014a], are slowly being introduced.

                35
The study of the exploration of gender and sexual identities has previously
                    focused on interaction in online MUDs, a digital space that requires its users
                    to have some coding knowledge or the willingness to learn coding, but digital
                    narratives accessible by a greater community, such as Sims games, ASM, and Hustle Cat, are beginning to realize the same
                    exploratory function as well, in particular by situating readers in an
                    environment where gender and sexuality are never fixed, where boundaries of a
                    structuralist ideology of gender and sexuality are continuously challenged. The
                    movement toward narratives where sexual difference and rigid configurations of
                    sexuality are rigorously being undermined might suggest that Cixous’s visions
                    are not that far behind.

            

        
        
            

        
    

Notes
[1]  Research for this project
                        was done with funding from the Australian Government Research Training
                        Program Scholarship.
[2]  There are significant differences between GLAAD’s
                        and the APA’s definition of one’s sexual orientation. GLAAD’s definition is
                        more general in that sexual orientation is seen as any attraction to another
                        person, whereas the APA’s definition specifies that said attraction be
                        toward a sex.
[3]  Oliver Laas’s chapter, “Narratives in
                            Digital Games: Their Place and Function in the Study of Digital
                            Games,” in Expanding Practices in
                            Audiovisual Narrative (2014) provides a good summary of the
                        narratological versus ludological debate.
[4]  In ASM, the protagonist may be faced with homophobic or
                        stereotypical remarks by side characters if the protagonist is in a same-sex
                        relationship. However, the reader and protagonist can neither confirm nor
                        deny their sexual orientation.
[5]  Sex, or
                            “playing in bed,” is not possible without the
                        installation of the expansion pack to the base game, The Sims: Livin’ Large. Heterosexual Sims do not have sex to
                        create a baby if the pack is not installed but do so through a dialogue
                        option.

Works Cited
American Psychological Association 2016 American
                    Psychological Association, 2016, “Guidelines for
                        Psychological Practice with Lesbian, Gay and Bisexual Clients”,
                    website (2016).Viewed 18 May 2016, http://www.apa.org/pi/lgbt/resources/guidelines.aspx.
Angel Cross 2012 Angel Cross, K. “The New Laboratory of Dreams: Role-playing Games as
                        Resistance”, Women's Studies Quarterly,
                    40.3–4 (2012), pp. 70–88.
Bal 1985 Bal, M., 1985, Narratology: Introduction to the Theory of Narrative. University of
                    Toronto Press, Toronto ; Buffalo (1985).
Barthes 1989 Barthes, R. “The
                        Reality Effect.” In: Howard, R. (Tran.), The
                        Rustle of Language. University of California Press (1989), pp.
                    141–148.
Bastal 2011a Bastal “Bioware
                        Neglected Their Core Audience: The Straight Male Gamer - General
                        Discussion”, forum post (17 March 2011). Viewed 24 May 2016, https://forum.bioware.com/topic/192281-bioware-neglected-their-core-audience-the-straight-male-gamer/
Bastal 2011b Bastal “Bioware
                        Neglected Their Core Audience: The Straight Male Gamer - General
                        Discussion”, forum post (18 March 2011). Viewed 24 May 2016, https://forum.bioware.com/topic/193167-bioware-neglected-their-core-audience-the-straight-male-gamer/
Binhammer 1991 Binhammer, K. “Metaphor or Metonymy? The Questions of Essentialism in
                        Cixous”, Tessera, 10 (1991), pp.
                    65–79.
Cassell 2000 Cassell, J. “Storytelling as a Nexus of Change in the Relationship between Gender and
                        Technology: A Feminist Approach to Software Design.” In: Cassell, J.,
                    Jenkins, H. (Eds.), From Barbie to Mortal Kombat: Gender and
                        Computer Games. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts (2000), pp.
                    298–326.
Cavallaro 2010 Cavallaro, D. “Anime and the Visual Novel: Theoretical Approaches.”
                    In: Anime and the Visual Novel: Narrative Structure, Design
                        and Play at the Crossroads of Animation and Computer Games.
                    McFarland & Co, Jefferson, North Carolina (2010), pp. 7–32.
Cavendish 2004 Cavendish, M. The Description of a New World, Called The Blazing
                        World, in: Lilley, K. (Ed.), The Blazing World
                        and Other Writings, Penguin Classics. Penguin, London ; New York
                    (2004), pp. 119–225.
Cixous 1976 Cixous, H. “The
                        Laugh of the Medusa”, Signs, 1.4 (1976),
                    pp. 875–893.
Condis 2015 Condis, M. “No
                        homosexuals in Star Wars? BioWare, ‘gamer’ identity, and
                        the politics of privilege in a convergence culture”, Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New
                        Media Technologies, 21.2 (2015), pp. 198–212.
                    doi:10.1177/1354856514527205
Consalvo 2003 Consalvo, M. “Hot Dates and Fairy-Tale Romances: Studying Sexuality in Video
                        Games.” In: Perron, B., Wolf, M. J. P. (Eds.), The Video Game Theory Reader. Routledge, New York (2003), pp.
                    171–194.
DanAndPhilGAMES 2014 DanAndPhilGAMES
                        “MEET 'DIL HOWLTER' - Dan and Phil Play: The Sims 4
                        #1”, online video (2014). Viewed 24 May 2016, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s_osQvkeNRM&feature=youtu.be
DateNighto 2016 DateNighto Hustle Cat, video
                    game, PC (2016).
Dovey 2006 Dovey, J., Kennedy, H. W. “Bodies and Machines: Cyborg Subjectivity and Gameplay.”
                    In: Games Cultures: Computer Games as New Media, Issues in
                        Cultural and Media Studies. Open University Press, Maidenhead
                    (2006), pp. 104–122.
Duncaaaaan 2014 Duncaaaaaan “Touchy Subject: A Critique Regarding Sexuality in this Game,
                        Character Design And Privilege: The Cisquisition? - General Discussion
                        (Spoilers)”, forum post (29 June 2014). Viewed 24 May 2016, https://forum.bioware.com/topic/508306-touchy-subject-a-critique-regarding-sexuality-in-this-game-character-design-and-privilege-the-cisquisition/
Electronic Arts 2000 Electronic Arts The Sims 1, video game, PC (2000).
Electronic Arts 2004 Electronic Arts The Sims 2, video game, PC (2004).
Electronic Arts 2009 Electronic Arts The Sims 3, video game, PC (2009).
Electronic Arts 2011 Electronic Arts Dragon Age 2, video game, PC (2011). 
Electronic Arts 2014a Electronic Arts Dragon Age: Inquisition, video game, PC (2014).
Electronic Arts 2014b Electronic Arts The Sims 4, video game, PC (2014).
Electronic Arts n.d. Electronic Arts “The Sims 3”, website (n.d.). Viewed 8 June 2016, http://au.thesims3.com/exchange. 
Entertainment Software Association 2015 Entertainment
                    Software Association The 2015 Essential Facts About the
                        Computer and Video Game Industry. Entertainment Software
                    Association, Washington (2015). 
Entertainment Software Association 2016 Entertainment
                    Software Association The 2016 Essential Facts About the
                        Computer and Video Game Industry. Entertainment Software
                    Association, Washington (2016).
Fanderclai 1996 Fanderclai, T. L. “Like Magic, Only Real.” In: Cherny, L., Weise, E. R.
                    (Eds.), Wired Women: Gender and New Realities in
                        Cyberspace. Seal Press ; Distributed to the trade by Publishers
                    Group West, Seattle, Washington ; Emeryville, California (1996), pp.
                    224–241.
Franklin 2015 Franklin, R. “The Sims - You’ve Made 92,800,000 Sims in The Sims 4’s First Year! -
                        Official Site”, website (2015). Viewed 8 June 2016, https://www.thesims.com/en_GB/news/sims4-1st-anniversary?cid=42764&sourceid=sims4-social-global-ic-tw-ts4-1yearblog-080215-tw-prev-site-sust&ts=1441217108407&utm_campaign=sims4-social-global-ic-tw-ts4-1yearblog-080215-tw-prev-site-sust&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.
Frasca 2003 Frasca, G. “Simulation versus Narrative: Introduction to Ludology.” In: Perron,
                    B., Wolf, M. J. P. (Eds.), The Video Game Theory
                        Reader. Routledge, New York (2003), pp. 221–236.
GLAAD 2011 GLAAD “GLAAD Media
                        Reference Guide - Transgender Issues”, website (2011). Viewed 18 May
                    2016, http://www.glaad.org/reference/transgender.
Gallagher 2006 Gallagher, C. “The Rise of Fictionality.” In: Moretti, F. (Ed.), The Novel. Princeton University Press, Princeton (2006),
                    pp. 336–363.
Galyean 1995 Galyean, T. A. “Narrative Guidance, in: AAAI Spring Symposium Series”, presented at
                    the Symposium on Interactive Story Systems, Stanford University (1995).
Ginsberg 1996 Ginsberg, E. K. Passing and the Fictions of Identity, New
                    Americanists. Duke University Press, Durham, North Carolina
                    (1996).
Greer 2013 Greer, S. “Playing
                        queer: Affordances for sexuality in Fable and Dragon Age”, Journal of Gaming and Virtual Worlds, 5.1 (2013), pp.
                    3–21. doi:10.1386/jgvw.5.1.3_1
Hayles 2008 Hayles, N. K. Electronic Literature: New Horizons for the Literary. University of
                    Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana (2008).
Jacksepticeye 2014 Jacksepticeye “KEEPING UP WITH THE BOSSES | The Sims 4”, online video
                    (2014). Viewed 24 May 2016, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f3BSbcEvtLc
Kang 2000 Kang, J. “Cyber-Race”, Harvard Law Review, 113.5
                    (2000), pp. 1130–1208. doi:10.2307/1342340
Kendall 1996 Kendall, L. “MUDder? I Hardly Know ’Er! Adventures of a Feminist MUDder.” In:
                    Cherny, L., Weise, E. R. (Eds.), Wired Women: Gender and
                        New Realities in Cyberspace. Seal Press ; Distributed to the trade
                    by Publishers Group West, Seattle, Washington ; Emeryville, California (1996),
                    pp. 207–223.
Lanser 1995 Lanser, S. S. “Sexing the Narrative: Propriety, Desire, and the Engendering of
                        Narratology”, Narrative, 3.1 (1995), pp.
                    85–94.
Lebowitz 2011 Lebowitz, J., Klug, C. Interactive Storytelling for Video Games: A Player-centered
                        Approach to Creating Memorable Characters and Stories. Focal Press,
                    Burlington, Massachusetts (2011).
McRae 1996 McRae, S. “Coming
                        Apart at the Seams: Sex, Text and the Virtual Body”, in: Cherny, L.,
                    Weise, E. R. (Eds.), Wired Women: Gender and New Realities
                        in Cyberspace. Seal Press ; Distributed to the trade by Publishers
                    Group West, Seattle, Washington ; Emeryville, California (1996), pp.
                    242–263.
Murray 1998 Murray, J. H. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace, 1st
                    edition. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts (1998).
Nakamura 1995 Nakamura, L. “Race in/for Cyberspace: Identity Tourism and Racial Passing on the
                        Internet”, Works Days, 13 (1995), pp.
                    181–93.
Nakamura 2008 Nakamura, L. “Cyberrace”, PMLA, 123.5 (2008), pp.
                    1673–1682.
Nguyen 2003 Nguyen, M. “Queer
                        Cyborgs and New Mutants: Race, Sexuality, and Prosthetic Sociality in
                        Digital Space.” In: Wong, S. C. (Ed.), Asian
                        America.Net: Ethnicity, Nationalism, and Cyberspace. Routledge, New
                    York (2003), pp. 281–305.
Nielsen 2015 Nielsen, D. “Identity Performance in Roleplaying Games”, Computers and Composition, 38.A (2015), pp. 45–56.
                    doi:10.1016/j.compcom.2015.09.003
Page 2006 Page, R. E. Literary
                        and Linguistic Approaches to Feminist Narratology. Palgrave
                    Macmillan, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire ; New York (2006).
Pewdiepie 2014 Pewdiepie “Sims 4 - Gameplay - Part 1 - MY NEW CHARACTER!”, online video
                    (2014). Viewed 24 May 2016, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wl253R_Yri4.
Rabinowitz 1977 Rabinowitz, P. J. “Truth in Fiction: A Reexamination of Audiences”, Critical Inquiry, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 121–141.
Ryan 2006 Ryan, M.- L. “From
                        Parallel Universes to Possible Worlds: Ontological Pluralism in Physics,
                        Narratology, and Narrative”, Poetics
                        Today, 27.4 (2006), pp. 633–674.
                    doi:10.1215/03335372-2006-006
Ryan 2009 Ryan, M.- L. “From
                        Narrative Games to Playable Stories: Toward a Poetics of Interactive
                        Narrative”, Storyworlds: A Journal of Narrative
                        Studies, 1 (2009), pp. 43–59.
Selig 2000 Selig, R. L. “The
                        Endless Reading of Fiction: Stuart Moulthrop’s Hypertext Novel ‘Victory Garden’”, Contemporary Literature, 41.4 (2000), pp. 642–660.
                    doi:10.2307/1209006
Sender 1999 Sender, K. “Selling Sexual Subjectivities: Audiences Respond to Gay Window
                        Advertising”, Critical Studies in Mass
                        Communication, 16.2 (1999), pp. 172–196.
Shaw 2009 Shaw, Adrienne. “Putting the Gay in Games: Cultural Production and GLBT Content in Video
                        Games”, Games and Culture, 4.3 (2009),
                    pp. 228–253.
SimsVIP 2016 SimsVIP “The
                        Sims 4: Gender Customization, Same Sex Pregnancy, and Unisex
                        Clothing”, website (2016). Viewed 21 December 2016, https://simsvip.com/2016/06/03/the-sims-4-gender-identity-same-sex-pregnancy-unisex-clothing/.
Taylor 2003 Taylor, T. L. “Multiple Pleasures Women and Online Gaming”, Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media
                        Technologies, 9.1 (2003), pp. 21–46.
                    doi:10.1177/135485650300900103
Turkle 1995 Turkle, S. Life
                        on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet. Simon &
                    Schuster, New York (1995).
Vagabond Dog 2014 Vagabond Dog Always Sometimes Monsters, video game, PC
                    (2014).
Valve Corporation 2017a Valve
                    Corporation “Always Sometimes Monsters on Steam”,
                    website (2017). 7 September 2017, http://store.steampowered.com/app/274310/
Valve Corporation 2017b Valve
                    Corporation “Hustle Cat on Steam”, website (2017).
                    Viewed 7 September 2017, http://store.steampowered.com/app/453340/
Valve Corporation 2017c Valve
                    Corporation “Small but Cool Detail :: Always Sometimes
                        Monsters General Discussions”, forum (24 May 2014). Viewed 7
                    September 2017, http://steamcommunity.com/app/274310/discussions/0/522728268734722170/
Valve Corporation 2017d Valve
                    Corporation “Steam Search”, website (2017). Viewed 7
                    September 2017, http://store.steampowered.com/search/?tags=3799
Walsh 2011 Walsh, R. “Emergent
                        Narrative in Interactive Media”, Narrative, 19.1 (2011), pp. 72–85. doi:10.1353/nar.2011.0006
Warhol 2015 Warhol, R., Lanser, S. S. Narrative Theory Unbound: Queer and Feminist
                        Interventions. The Ohio State University Press, Ohio (2015).
Zagal 2010 Zagal, J. P., Mateas, M. “Time in Video Games: A Survey and Analysis”, Simulation & Gaming, 41.6 (2010), pp. 844–868.
                    doi:10.1177/1046878110375594

2017 11.3
             | 
            XML
            | 
            Print Article


Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

 
            URL: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000331/000331.html
Last updated:
            
 Comments: dhqinfo@digitalhumanities.org
 Published by:
            The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
Affiliated with: Literary and Linguistic Computing
 Copyright 2005 - 
[image: Creative Commons License]
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
        


