[image: DHQ Logo]
[image: Digital Humanities Quarterly Logo]

homesubmissionsabout dhqdhq peoplecontact
 




Current Issue
	2017: 11.3

Preview Issue
	2017: 11.4

Previous Issues
	2017: 11.2
	2017: 11.1
	2016: 10.4
	2016: 10.3
	2016: 10.2
	2016: 10.1
	2015: 9.4
	2015: 9.3
	2015: 9.2
	2015: 9.1
	2014: 8.4
	2014: 8.3
	2014: 8.2
	2014: 8.1
	2013: 7.3
	2013: 7.2
	2013: 7.1
	2012: 6.3
	2012: 6.2
	2012: 6.1
	2011: 5.3
	2011: 5.2
	2011: 5.1
	2010: 4.2
	2010: 4.1
	2009: 3.4
	2009: 3.3
	2009: 3.2
	2009: 3.1
	2008: 2.1
	2007: 1.2
	2007: 1.1

Indexes
	 Title
	 Author


[image: sidenavbarimg]ISSN 1938-4122

Announcements
	Call for Reviewers
	Call for Submissions


[image: button1-addthis.gif]

DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly
2017
Volume 11 Number 3
2017 11.3
                     | 
                    XML

| 
		   Discuss
			(
				Comments
			)
                



    
        
            
                
                Digital Humanities Pedagogy as Essential Liberal Education: A
                    Framework for Curriculum Development

                Brandon T. Locke <brandontlocke_at_gmail_dot_com>, Michigan State University

            
            

            
        
        
        
        
     


    
        
            Abstract

                
                Digital humanities projects and methods are becoming increasingly common in
                    undergraduate humanities classrooms. Digital projects and exercises allow
                    students to engage with new technology, collaborate with peers, graduate
                    students, and faculty, and produce tangible scholarship that is publicly
                    visible. The Lab for the Education and Advancement in Digital Research (LEADR),
                    a new student-focused digital humanities initiative at Michigan State
                    University, has introduced digital components into large numbers of of History
                    and Anthropology courses. Through two years of courses, it has proven fruitful
                    to frame these not as “Digital Humanities projects,” but as
                    part of a digital liberal arts curriculum that seeks to teach students not only
                    about the domain-specific content, but also essential skills for information
                    retrieval and analysis, media literacy, and communication in the digital age.
                    This framework places these skills as extensions of longstanding skills,
                    literacies, and knowledges that humanities and social sciences have contributed
                    towards liberal arts education. 

            

            
        
        
            
                
                    We ought to be able not only to find any kind of document on
                        the Web, but also to create any kind of document, easily. We should be able
                        not only to follow links, but to create them–between all sorts of media. We
                        should be able not only to interact with other people, but to create with
                        other people. Intercreativity is the process of making things or solving
                        problems together. If interactivity is not just sitting there passively in
                        front of a display screen, then intercreativity is not just sitting there in
                        front of something 'interactive'.
                     [Berners-Lee and Fischetti 1999]
                


            

            1
As the field of digital humanities continues to gain traction in disciplinary
                departments and in libraries, digital projects and methods are becoming increasingly
                common in undergraduate humanities classrooms. Digital projects and exercises allow
                students to engage with new technology, collaborate with peers, graduate students,
                and faculty, and produce tangible scholarship that is publicly visible. Shining
                examples of these types of experiences are illustrated in edited volumes such as
                    Digital Humanities Pedagogy and Teaching History in the Digital Age, and Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities, in journals like
                    Hybrid Pedagogy and Journal of
                    Interactive Technology and Pedagogy, at conferences such as ILiADS,
                HASTAC, and Bucknell’s Digital Scholarship Conference, and in numerous blog posts
                and project pages. As Director of the Lab for the Education and Advancement in
                Digital Research (LEADR), a lab specializing in digital research for students in
                humanities and social sciences at Michigan State University, my focus is to develop
                these types of experiences for undergraduate in collaboration with faculty. Through
                working with faculty, librarians, graduate students, and undergraduates, we have
                begun to frame these not as “Digital Humanities projects,” but as
                part of a digital liberal arts curriculum. This frames our work as teaching students
                about the domain-specific content, alongside essential skills for information
                retrieval and analysis, media literacy, and communication in the digital age.[1] This intentional focus on crucial
                critical thinking and skills in the digital realm is the result of our students’
                lack of knowledge and skills in using digital media and tools for communication and
                critical analysis, and is backed by research on technology use in the United
                States.

            2
The World Wide Web that gained commercial success in the early and mid-1990s was very
                much a read-only medium, where only a privileged few had the skills and the
                resources to create material that others could access online. The
                    “read-only” web continued into the new millennium, as a
                sliver of the population began to learn HTML (or software development languages like
                Java) on their own or in colleges and upper-middle class high schools. In the
                mid-2000s, Web 2.0 brought about blogging platforms, wikis, message boards, and
                social media, significantly lowering the barrier to participation. Simultaneously,
                the digital divide began to narrow, largely due to mobile access becoming more
                available to lower-income communities. Today, though the digital divide persists in
                the US in rural, poor, and elderly communities, 84% of American adults use the
                Internet, and over half of US Internet users have posted photos and videos they have
                taken to the web (including 81% of internet users age 18-29), and many more use
                social media, blogs, or personal websites to produce content for the web. With the
                ubiquity of the web as a platform for communication and knowledge production,
                critical digital media production and communication in higher education is worth
                examination [Perrin and Duggan 2015]
                [Duggan 2013].

            3
In higher education, the conversation surrounding digital technologies has largely
                been dictated by the characterization of “digital natives,”
                drawing from Mark Prensky’s influential 2001 article, “Digital
                    natives, digital immigrants”
                [Prensky 2001]. Digital natives and digital immigrants are the two
                archetypes often used to represent the purported gap in technical proficiency
                between younger people who have grown up with “the digital language of computers, videogames and the
                        Internet,”
                     [Prensky 2001, 6] and older people, who are moving into digital technology from an analog
                world. Many in higher education seem to have internalized the idea of digital
                natives, and presume that students have the inherent ability and tools to work
                critically and develop digital content [Bennett and Maton 2011]. The digital
                native/digital immigrant concept has been well-criticized for taking a homogenous
                view of the generation, ignoring digital divides based on location, race, and
                income, as well as disparities that encourage young boys to learn technology at a
                higher rate than young girls [Brake 2014]
                [Hargittai and Walejko 2008]
                [Thomas 2011]. Despite the clear problems with the concept of digital
                natives, the presumption that young people as a whole are well versed in digital
                media and communication remains strong in classrooms and curriculum development
                committees [Langan et al. 2016]
                [ALA 2013]
                [Hobbs 2010].

            4
Implicit in the rhetoric of the digital native is the notion that students are
                skilled in both the use and creation of digital content. This ranges from the
                scientific — studies do show that the majority of young people are using, creating,
                and publishing digital content — to the anecdotal — teachers, parents, and
                professors alike have stories about how their students or children have had to
                assist them with new technologies. Though many in higher education generalize their
                undergraduate students as being well acquainted with technology and approach their
                studies through a digital lens, students often struggle when it comes to critical
                content creation and mediation. The characterization of undergraduates as
                    “digital natives” ignores the significant portion of students
                who are from an older generation, as well as students whose families and schools
                were not able to afford these devices. Even for students who have grown up with
                digital devices and can fairly easily adapt to digital interfaces, they have most
                often grown up as consumers of digital media and commercialized sharing
                services. Students are often much less adept at creating content that is not tightly
                mediated by some kind of commercial service with restrictions on form (e.g.
                Snapchat, Twitter, Facebook). Commercial services limit the form and functionality
                (though not necessarily the creativity) of content created to advocate for social or
                political change, analysis, information, art and entertainment, or commercial
                interests, and create a greater divide between those who can freely communicate in
                digital forms, and those who can communicate only through limited form.

            5
There should be reason for concern that students are often taking part in digital
                information and media transmission, but are not currently trained in the literacies
                and affordances of the technology they use. For the most part, content creation and
                sharing involves proprietary software or services that heavily mediate creation.
                This means that some “tech skills” often come through narrow
                technology that limits potential outcomes and often monetizes user-created content —
                platforms and software such as Twitter, Instagram, Snapchat, YikYak, PowerPoint, and
                Facebook create a rigid form for content, and make simple interfaces for creation
                and publication. While this is greatly beneficial in that it provides a low bar, it
                means that users become skilled at using a particular tool, not in the theoretical
                or technical principles, or even potential options. Tool-based literacy limits
                sustainability, cross-platform work, and understanding of the impact of media upon
                the message. Critical evaluation of digital media and the means to produce them is
                valuable for both consumption and production of digital media and information. The
                integration of digital skills in the liberal arts course is an opportunity to
                promote the continued strength of a skilled, literate, critical culture. Ideally,
                digital content creation and publication should be done using free and open source
                means, or at least software that is widely used and amenable to multiple sources of
                distribution. This allows users to continue their creative, civic, and personal
                communication or media production with platform and service agnostic tools, and a
                better understanding of production.

            6
Consider the following example: If a person wished to promote a social justice group,
                she may do so easily using platforms like Facebook, Twitter, and Snapchat. She could
                develop a Facebook page with a text description and distribute photos, video, and
                calls to action via all three platforms. However, she is forced to adhere to limits
                of each platform, such as design constraints, inability to use custom HTML/CSS, and
                size and space constraints. She may also be forced to pay to promote content for
                others to see her group’s media. Furthermore, she is subject to the limits of the
                platforms’ terms of use. Should she experience harassment or misbehavior on these
                platforms, she will likely be powerless to prevent it. On Facebook, for example, she
                is required to use her full legal name (and would be required to provide legal
                documentation if challenged). Meanwhile, the content she produces is monetized by
                the platform on which she publishes. If, on the other hand, she were skilled at
                creating media, she would be able to create a standalone website to host media in
                whatever size and form she desires; she would have freedom to style and hyperlink
                any text, and she (and her organization) retains sole rights to the use and reuse of
                their content. Once content is produced to the website, social media platforms may
                be leveraged to generate site traffic.

            
                Liberal Arts in the Digital Age

                7
While many in higher education are calling for more (and better) digital pedagogy
                    for students, the field of Digital Humanities continues to experience
                    substantial growth [Hirsch 2012]
                    [Thomas and Lorang 2014]. An increasing number of universities are offering
                    minors, majors, and specializations in Digital Humanities and similar fields,
                    and still more are including digital project development and critique of
                    existing digital projects in coursework. Rather than continuing to produce
                    students who are unfamiliar with many of the common communication, analysis, and
                    research methods of the modern day, this framework seeks to apply a liberal arts
                    rationale for the development of critical analysis and development of web
                    interaction and writing, multimodal projects, data analysis and visualization,
                    and large-scale analysis.[2] These skills all have parallels in liberal
                    arts classrooms that have been taught for generations, such as effective
                    persuasive writing, critical analysis of arguments, and techniques for research
                    and information source analysis. If instructors are not familiar enough with
                    these technologies to teach them themselves, partnerships with digital
                    humanities specialists, librarians, or instructional designers can be
                    productive.

            

            
                The Lab Model for Digital Research

                8
Founded in August of 2014, LEADR is both a physical space and a curriculum
                    development initiative developed as a collaboration between the Department of
                    History, the Department of Anthropology, and Matrix: The Center for Digital
                    Humanities and Social Science at Michigan State University, a large public
                    research university in the United States. LEADR emerged out of feeling that
                    students needed to engage more critically with the digital materials and
                    techniques that faculty were using for their own research. The space itself was
                    designed to facilitate collaboration and openness in a decentralized learning
                    space. Nearly all of the furniture is movable, facilitating shifts between
                    seminar-style arrangement and group project work, in addition to decentralized
                    poster-like presentation spaces. LEADR is also fully equipped with large screens
                    for group work, machines, cameras, audio and light kits, 3D printers, micro
                    computing equipment, and other technology to facilitate innovative digital work.
                    The LEADR staff, comprised of two full-time academic staff members and three PhD
                    students from the History and Anthropology departments, assist faculty with the
                    development of assignments, develop and teach digitally-focused instruction and
                    discussion sessions, provide assistance in developing grading guidelines, and
                    staff the lab space, which is open nearly fifty hours per week.

                9
LEADR works with courses at all levels (graduate as well as undergraduate) and
                    across a number of departments, programs, and colleges. Faculty in History and
                    Anthropology teach the vast majority of courses, but these courses can be listed
                    as History, Anthropology, Integrated Social Science, residential colleges, or
                    other programs. Although some courses are specifically developed as Digital
                    History or Digital Humanities courses, most courses visit the lab a few times
                    per semester, often with at least one visit aimed solely at a flipped
                    classroom-style work session, where students read or watch content ahead of time
                    and complete activities or project work in the classroom. The LEADR component
                    for these courses is similar to the use of labs in many science courses – it is
                    an opportunity for students to take the content and methods that they have read
                    and discussed and apply them in hands-on experiences where they can build,
                    experiment, and play, and then reflect on their experiences.

                10
For our students entering the fields of History, Anthropology, or related fields
                    as graduate students, researchers, or careers in libraries, galleries, or
                    museums, the benefits of digital humanities skills may be fairly apparent. These
                    skills enable them to engage with emerging work and to produce their own
                    research, projects, or critiques capable of making public and scholarly impact.
                    However, for students taking these courses as non-majors fulfilling degree
                    requirements, the benefits may be less obvious, especially to the students
                    themselves. For these reasons, it is important to break down the skills,
                    methodologies, and literacies that comprise or could comprise digital humanities
                    coursework, and to subsequently focus on these skills when creating digital
                    curricula and adding digital activities and assignments to existing courses.

                11
Rather than teaching “Digital Humanities,” we began thinking
                    about project building as an entryway to teaching essential liberal arts skills
                    using new media and web publishing, and visualization and analysis tools. There
                    are many great reasons to incorporate digital project creation into courses —
                    students build technical skills, create scholarship that is accessible to
                    others, approach their research objects in new and dynamic ways, collaborate and
                    develop project management skills, learn emerging methods of knowledge,
                    production, and build their portfolio. If constructed thoughtfully, the
                    literacies, hard skills, and soft skills that go into digital humanities work
                    can contribute both directly to the growth of knowledge and capabilities within
                    students’ own disciplines. They can also contribute more generalizable skills
                    that can be understood as digital extensions of long-standing liberal arts
                    skills that History, Anthropology, and other disciplines have long imparted to
                    students, such as writing, evaluation, critical thinking, and synthesis. The
                    ability to break these down and understand them as teaching liberal arts in the
                    digital age allows for more clarity in the development of assignments, and it is
                    also a useful way to encourage instructors to integrate these projects and
                    activities into their classrooms. 

            

            
                DH Pedagogy as Essential Liberal Arts

                12
The framework employed in LEADR consists of four flexible learning objectives
                    that can be packaged and built upon to meet the needs of the course and the
                    desired outcomes of the faculty member and partners. The objectives are 1)
                    Information Literacy, 2) Digital Literacy, 3) Data Literacy, and 4)
                    Computational Analysis.

                
                    Information Literacy

                    13
Students in LEADR are often required to develop digital projects that include
                        digital primary sources, including digital collections and narrative-driven
                        websites. Usage of digital objects can range from a few photographs used to
                        illustrate central concepts in writing to creating exhibits that draw upon
                        large collections of digitized documents, artifacts, and photographs.
                        Because primary source discovery and evaluation is a critical component of
                        nearly all projects, information literacy instruction in conjunction with
                        LEADR often begins with a strong focus on finding, evaluating, and
                        understanding digital information. Librarians at MSU Libraries are often
                        brought into classrooms to fulfill this learning frame, drawing upon their
                        expertise in information literacy and the usage of digital resources. 

                    14
The American Library Association defines information literacy as “an overarching set of abilities in which students
                                are consumers and creators of information who can participate
                                successfully in collaborative spaces”
                             [ACRL 2015]. The information literacy objectives used in LEADR are informed by
                        the ACRL’s Framework for Information Literacy for
                            Higher Education, which includes six frames [ACRL 2015]:

                    	Authority Is Constructed and Contextual
	Information Creation as a Process
	Information Has Value
	Research as Inquiry
	Scholarship as Conversation
	Searching as Strategic Exploration



                    15
The sources students use for their digital projects — images, datasets,
                        documents, film, etc. — can be found all over the web. Many resources,
                        especially images, can be located with incomplete metadata, incorrect
                        information or with questionable provenance. Although studies have shown
                        that students do usually end up in library journal databases when seeking
                        reliable or scholarly sources, based on experiences in the LEADR classroom,
                        students rarely think about similar repositories for accessing primary
                        source material [Asher and Duke 2012]. Source location and evaluation
                        exercises in LEADR have shown that the great majority of students turn
                        directly to Google Image Search when asked to find a historic photograph to
                        use as a source. To alleviate this problem, students are introduced to
                        librarians early on, and have a session on finding and working with primary
                        source material whenever relevant. In addition to learning about available
                        resources through library databases, students are shown local collections in
                        the MSU Museum or the MSU Library Special Collections. This gives students
                        the additional benefit of meeting and speaking with the curators and
                        librarians who possess relevant expertise about the collections, and
                        students are strongly encouraged to visit the locations and conduct more
                        research. These exercises are molded to meet the Authority is Constructed and Contextual and Searching as Strategic Exploration frames.

                    16
Legal and ethical intellectual property use is a key component of digital
                        literacy in the classroom. Throughout the first two years of courses in
                        LEADR, a substantial portion of students would correctly cite the sources
                        they used in their writing, but would use images on their projects without
                        citations, even when this was mentioned as a requirement. There is seemingly
                        a disconnect between traditional requirements of paper writing and web
                        project development. In response to this, LEADR staff, librarians, or museum
                        staff put strong emphasis on the Information Has Value
                        frame, including lessons on citation practices in academic writing,
                        copyright, Creative Commons licensing, and fair use in courses by discussing
                        preferred media citation practices for the digital platform being used.

                    17
Ithaka S&R’s recent US Faculty Survey shows that information literacy
                        remains both valued and underdeveloped in the Humanities and Social Science
                        classrooms. Over 60% of Humanities faculty and approximately 55% of Social
                        Science faculty strongly agreed with the statement “My
                            undergraduate students have poor skills related to locating and
                            evaluating scholarly information,” while over two thirds of both
                        faculty groups strongly agreed with the statement, “Improving my undergraduate students’ research
                                skills related to locating and evaluating scholarly information is
                                an important educational goal for the courses I teach”
                             [Wolff et al. 2016, 57–64]. Focused studies on information usage in the classroom have shown
                        that most US faculty find that the greatest issue students have is not in
                        finding appropriate material, but instead in thinking critically and using
                        these sources to augment a larger argument [Foster 2013]
                        [Head 2013]
                        [Dimmock 2013, 12]. In-class exercises go beyond access,
                        and engage students in deeper evaluations of the sources they have found.
                        These exercises, which draw on deeper engagement with resources, allow MSU
                        Libraries and LEADR staff to build on the aforementioned frames, as well as
                        frames such as Research as Inquiry, Scholarship as Conversation, and Authority is Constructed and Contextual.


                    18
Potential Information Literacy Topics: Determine the
                        extent of information needed; access and evaluate secondary and primary
                        sources; understand source biases and evaluation; understand economic,
                        legal, and social issues surrounding the use of information

                    
                        Information Literacy Example: Historical Sources and Their Uses

                        
                            Assignment

                            19
Working with Bobby Smiley of Michigan State University Libraries,
                                students in an introductory historical methods course (HST 201)
                                located primary sources related to their research, and then found
                                secondary journal sources that directly engage those primary
                                sources. Once students located these sources, they placed selected
                                primary sources in conversation with matching secondary sources to
                                identify how historians use primary sources.

                        

                        
                            Process

                            20
The ability to source material for research is essential to scholarly
                                practices, and the library furnishes an excellent resource for
                                locating those sources, as well as helping students understand how
                                they are used in scholarship. The first component of this lesson
                                required students to familiarize themselves with specific library
                                resources to find primary source documents of interest (whether in
                                the catalog, or a highlighted database), and then secondary source
                                journal articles which remark on the primary source. To understand
                                how the historian uses a primary source in their analysis, both
                                documents were placed in JuxtaCommons, which displays documents side-by-side. This
                                program highlights exact phrases appearing in both documents,
                                enabling students to see how one source is used in the other.
                                Accompanying activities examined fidelity to original sources,
                                analysis of use in secondary sources and a comparison of context in
                                the primary document, in addition to understanding how historical
                                arguments are constructed. 

                            21
As befits a library-specific approach, instruction is framed by
                                beginning with informational literacy principles from the ACRL
                                Revised Framework, which undergird the class exercise. In this case,
                                the focus is on the framework element, Authority is Constructed and Contextual, which is
                                paired with the data informational literacy competency, Discovery and Acquisition
                                [ACRL 2015]
                                [Shorish 2015]. When creating a learning outcome for
                                the class, those two elements are combined with an appropriate
                                disciplinary expectation — in this case, the AHA's History Discipline Core
                                [AHA]. The idea of crosswalking and aligning these
                                elements is to stress how an information literacy-focused approach
                                to working with digital sources and tools transcends demonstration
                                and is instead anchored firmly in library and disciplinary-oriented
                                teaching and learning.

                        

                        
                            Learning Outcomes

                            22
Students will able to locate primary and secondary source materials
                                and from the library's e-resources, and use to those sources to
                                identify how historians use sources in constructing their
                                analyses.

                        

                    

                

                
                    Digital Literacy

                    23
The critical production and consumption of digital media is much more
                        effective with an understanding of both the technical principles and
                        theoretical affordances of the media. Digital communication is not only
                        important in the disciplinary sense, as History and Anthropology scholarship
                        is increasingly being produced digitally, but also as an essential skill for
                        participation in civic society. In LEADR, students learn how to write for a
                        web audience in a variety of ways — identifying audiences and users, using
                        appropriate rhetoric, structuring narratives to function well on the web,
                        integrating multimedia, and using HTML/CSS or a content management system
                        (CMS) to publish and distribute scholarship. The American Library
                        Association defines digital literacy as “the ability to use information and communication
                                technologies to find, understand, evaluate, create, and communicate
                                digital information, an ability that requires both cognitive and
                                technical skills”
                             [ALA 2013, 1]. There is a great deal of overlap between the ALA’s Information
                        Literacy and Digital Literacy frameworks, but their Digital Literacy report
                        can be instructive for the production, reuse, and communication of digital
                        information. ALA’s digital literacy report stresses that academic libraries
                        play a key role, as undergraduate students are not nearly as digitally
                        literate as often assumed [ALA 2013, 5–17]. “Generally, neither children nor adults acquire
                                critical thinking skills about mass media, popular culture or
                                digital media just by using technology tools themselves…One thing is
                                certain: simply buying computers for schools [and libraries] does
                                not necessarily lead to digital and media literacy education”
                             [Hobbs 2010, 25]
                        [ALA 2013]. The critical evaluation of the
                            “digital-ness” of an object promotes a better use of
                        the affordances of the media and information, while also understanding
                        external implications, such as ethical and legal rights, privacy, permanence
                        and impermanence, audience reception, and feedback. 

                    24
Metaliteracy, the expansion of traditional information skills (determine,
                        access, locate, understand, produce, use) as described by Thomas P. Mackey
                        and Trudi E. Jacobson, plays a key role in teaching students to produce and
                        remix digital content [Mackey and Jacobson 2014]. Mackey and Jacobson have
                        expanded the traditional notions to include “the
                            collaborative production and sharing of information in participatory
                            digital environments” that, crucially, “requires an ongoing adaptation to emerging
                                technologies and an understanding of the critical thinking and
                                reflection required to engage in these spaces as producers,
                                collaborators, and distributors”
                             [Mackey and Jacobson 2014, 1]. Mackey and Jacobson list the following metaliteracy learning goals
                        and objectives:

                    	Understand format type and delivery mode
	Evaluate user feedback as active researcher 
	Create a context for user-generated information 
	Evaluate dynamic content critically 
	Produce original content in multiple media formats 
	Understand personal privacy, information ethics and intellectual
                            property issues 
	Share information in participatory environments 



                    25
Metaliteracy also addresses the challenges of maintaining literacy over time.
                        Technologies change, and the (mostly) proprietary platforms that make
                        production and publication easy will require sustained monetary
                        contributions and will likely fade away in lieu of new ones. This means
                        there should be a focus on communication using open and sustainable tools
                        that allow for total freedom and ownership of content, including the
                        creation of video and visualizations and the production of content on flat
                        HTML files, or at least an open source CMS. It should also include the
                        metacognition that is at the center of Mackey and Jacobson's metaliteracy.
                        Metacognition allows for an understanding of content creation within a
                        system of moving and evolving parts, enabling (at least partially) an
                        ability to adapt to new technologies and environments [Mackey and Jacobson 2014, 41–44].

                    26
Potential Digital Literacy Topics: Web publication
                        (HTML/CSS and CMS), user experience, multimodal communication, film
                        composition and editing, critical engagement with technology, social media,
                        and third party data collection

                    
                        Digital Literacy Example: Digital Atlas of Egyptian Archaeology

                        
                            Assignment

                            27
Anthropology students collaboratively developed an atlas of
                                archaeology sites as a final project for an Archaeology of Ancient
                                Egypt course (ANP 455).[3]
                            

                        

                        
                            Process

                            28
Students had a basic introduction to HTML and CSS through a class
                                session in LEADR, and developed skills using Codecademy modules with
                                staff available to help. Students then learned about Git, GitHub,
                                and collaborative coding through a subsequent class session. To
                                build the project, students forked the course website, copied and
                                customized an HTML template for their site, then added their
                                location information to a CSV that comprises the back-end of the
                                map, then did a pull request to make their changes visible in the
                                main repository. 

                        

                        
                            Learning Outcomes

                            29
Students have a basic understanding of experience in collaborative
                                coding, version control (Git), and primary web technologies.

                        

                    

                

                
                    Data Literacy

                    30
As “open data” and “big data” become
                        increasingly common phrases, the ability to access, refine, manipulate,
                        critically evaluate, and share data becomes more of an essential skill.
                        Librarians and data curators have made efforts in recent years to move
                        curation “up the stream,” and to train researchers and
                        scholars to start data collection with good practices in mind. This greatly
                        increases reusability and clarity of the data, and reduces the work required
                        in preparing the data for sharing. Training often occurs in university-wide
                        workshops, brief seminars to train researchers in data curation practices,
                        or perhaps a lab-specific workshop faculty, staff, and graduate student
                        researchers [Carlson et al. 2011]. These sessions teach attendees
                        about establishing metadata standards early on in the research process,
                        documenting their data processing, and using sustainable formatting, among
                        other curation practices, but are often brief and divorced from content and
                        community practices [Carlson and Johnson 2015, 2–3]. Instead,
                        teaching data principles in courses allows for a greater focus on uses of
                        the data that take full consideration of the context and the potential
                        questions that could be asked of the data.

                    31
The Data Information Literacy (DIL) initiative, led by Jake Carlson and Lisa
                        R. Johnson, is an extension of the ACRL Information Literacy Framework that
                        focuses on both the creation and consumption of data. The authors describe
                        DIL as “...merg[ing] the concepts of researcher-as-producer
                                and researcher-as-consumer of data products. As such it builds upon
                                and reintegrates data, statistical, information and science data
                                literacy into an emerging skill set”
                             [Carlson et al. 2011, 634]. Data information literacy is a framework designed to be integrated
                        into courses and graduate research processes in the context of
                        subject-specific data and domain-based community practices. DIL is comprised
                        of 12 primary frames: 

                    	Introduction to Databases and Data Formats
	Discovery and Acquisition of Data
	Data Management and Organization
	Data Conversion and Interoperability
	Quality Assurance
	Metadata
	Data Curation and Re-use
	Cultures of Practice
	Data Preservation
	Data Analysis
	Data Visualization
	Ethics, including citation of data



                    32
The target community for data literacy is typically limited to those doing
                        research for peer-reviewed publication — faculty, academic staff, graduate
                        students, and undergraduate research assistants [Carlson and Johnson 2015]
                        [Shorish 2015]. However, these are valuable skills for all
                        citizens, and basic introductions to concepts should be taught broadly at
                        the undergraduate level. Data skills and literacies are becoming crucial, as
                        terms like ‘big data’ become more and more pervasive in the news, scholarly
                        research, and across industries, and governments and other entities
                        increasingly make data open in the name of transparency. Without the skills
                        to access and evaluate data, there can be great hurdles to successfully use
                        and analyze these resources as scholars, citizens, and employees.

                    33
With growing access to humanities datasets through both library vendors and
                        open repositories, data literacies and skills can greatly benefit students
                        in History and Anthropology courses working on small, course-based or thesis
                        research projects.[4] One promising project for
                        effective information and data literacy pedagogy in the humanities is the
                            Library-Led DH Pedagogy: Modeling Paths Toward
                            Information and Data Literacy symposium [Padilla et al. 2015]. Librarians at Michigan State University
                        specializing in digital humanities, data curation, and information literacy
                        called a symposium of librarians and disciplinary faculty from across the
                        region to discuss and develop library instruction that melds together
                        disciplinary information and data literacy needs.

                    34
The ability to evaluate and use data gives students the ability to ask
                        different types of questions, and to utilize growing resources for analysis.
                        Data literacy skills have great utility that extends beyond large research
                        projects, and even beyond academic research. New technologies and the
                        increasingly widespread use (and misuse) of data visualization in journalism
                        and politics make data competencies such as collection, evaluation, and
                        management a crucial skillset. Data skills are essential if we wish to
                        transform students from passive data consumers to critical consumers and
                        producers of data. In LEADR, data literacy lessons are delivered using
                        domain-specific data as well as domain-specific norms for data curation and
                        manipulation, but examples and use-cases from mainstream sources are
                        discussed whenever relevant.

                    35
Potential Data Literacy Topics: Data collection,
                        manipulation, cleaning, and structuring; critical evaluation of data; data
                        sharing and publication

                    
                        Data Literacy Example: Archaeology Field School Data
                            Visualization

                        
                            Assignment

                            36
Campus Archaeology Field School (ANP 464) students learned about
                                archaeological data structure, data organization, and visualization
                                in two sessions in LEADR.[5]
                            

                        

                        
                            Process

                            37
Students were introduced to basic concepts of data structure and
                                organization, such as the difference between structured and
                                unstructured data, foundational metadata, and principles of Tidy Data
                                [Wickham 2014]. Students were then introduced to data
                                from previous Campus Archaeology digs, and were shown how to
                                manipulate the data in order to visualize and analyze it with the
                                selected tools. In the first session, students were introduced
                                geospatial data and used CartoDB to map artifacts and analyze their spatial
                                distribution. In the second session, students used Raw to visualize
                                item-level metadata. Both sessions included ample time for students
                                to experiment with the tools and data, and produce their own
                                visualizations. They were then asked to reflect on their findings
                                and produce a blog post on their experiences. 

                        

                        
                            Learning Outcomes

                            38
Students are able to think critically about the ways in which data
                                can be collected, analyzed, and curated. Students also learned the
                                affordances of particular data types and data sets, and how data
                                collection can impact the understanding and analysis of
                                archaeological collections.

                        

                    

                

                
                    Computational Analysis

                    39
Computational analysis is used here to signify a wide-ranging set of tools
                        and methodologies that rely upon computational processes to assist in the
                        asking and exploring of research questions, including but not limited to
                        text mining, network analysis, GIS and web mapping, 3D modeling, desktop
                        fabrication, and topic modeling. These lessons are grounded in disciplinary
                        methodology, and illustrate the ways in which scholars are using
                        computationally-aided methods to ask new questions of their sources, as well
                        as exploring more traditional questions. Once the methodological groundwork
                        is established, students are instructed in the usage of a tool or tools, and
                        then encouraged to experiment with the tool(s) and dataset(s) before
                        reflecting on the experience. 

                    40
Although computational analysis is often seen as a means to a scholarly end,
                        it holds great value in its ability to challenge students to think
                        differently about a resource — to break down the way we convey information
                        and think about ways to work through those abstractions. The disciplinary
                        benefit is not necessarily the development of computational research skills,
                        but instead in teaching students about research methodologies and new ways
                        of thinking about sources [Mahony and Pierazzo 2012]
                        [Sayers et al. 2016]. Computational methods can serve as valuable
                        aids to think about datasets, electronic representations of materials and
                        cultures, and the affordances that come with each. Stephen Ramsay, long a
                        proponent of teaching programming as a way to help students learn both
                        computational and humanistic thinking, wrote, “The center of digital humanities, after all, is not
                                the technology, but the particular form of engagement that
                                characterizes the act of building tools, models, frameworks and
                                representations for the traditional objects of humanistic
                                study”
                             [Ramsay 2012]. Emerging practices in physical computing and desktop fabrication
                        allow for the making, breaking and alteration of real and speculative
                        objects, enabling interested parties to engage critically with the form,
                        function, and materiality of objects [Sayers et al. 2016].

                    41
Teaching the ubiquity of this kind of analysis, along with critical
                        approaches to the strengths and shortcomings of such analysis, can help to
                        remove the black box that often surrounds such digital outputs, and allows
                        for thoughtful criticism of these methods employed in our everyday lives.
                        For example, the usage of text mining and text analysis in the undergraduate
                        humanities classroom does not only lead to learning more about the content
                        and the humanities methodology, but also about the potential and limits of
                        surveillance analytics [Sinclair and Rockwell 2012]. Likewise, critical
                        makerspaces can contribute to “advanced thinking and
                            policy-development around critical issues like privacy, surveillance,
                            intellectual property, consumerism in education, data exploitation, and
                            sustainability and the environment” and “foster productive thinking on issues of
                                representation, contingency, privilege, and other structural
                                problems in academic labor”
                             [Sayers et al. 2016, 16].

                    42
Potential Computational Analysis: Text analysis, 3D
                        fabrication and modeling, network analysis, mapping

                    
                        Computational Analysis Example: Intro to Text Mining with
                            Tweets

                        
                            Assignment

                            43
Students in Eating Industrial (ISS 310) evaluated the rhetoric
                                surrounding different types of food using several collections of a
                                few thousand food-related tweets.[6]
                            

                        

                        
                            Process

                            44
Prior to the LEADR session, students read a linguistics study of the
                                rhetoric of food reviews on Yelp, an online business review company,
                                and thought about how they may approach large collections of text to
                                analyze the modern processed food industry [Jurafsky et al. 2014]. Once students arrived in class, they
                                were invited to browse several thousand tweets archived via a number
                                of food-based Twitter searches, and to think about how they may
                                design an analysis of the sample tweets. Students evaluated each of
                                the default analysis tools in Voyant, and were given examples of how to use the
                                visualizations, statistics, and concordances to construct an
                                analysis of the corpus. Following the session, students were asked
                                to write a blog post reflecting on their process and their findings.
                            

                        

                        
                            Learning Outcomes

                            45
Students learn how to use text mining and exploratory text analysis
                                to develop and answer research questions, and gain an understanding
                                of distant reading techniques and methods.

                        

                    

                

            

            
                Benefits of the Framework

                46
The use of this framework over the past academic year has led to a number of
                    changes in the ways courses are conceptualized, structured, and taught. On the
                    whole, these changes have contributed to more course partnerships, to more
                    immersive and engaged assignments and activities, evaluation that focuses on
                    literacies and reflection more than final product, and, in the end, more
                    undergraduate students who are equipped with technical and critical thinking
                    skillsets for engagement in digital environments on and off campus. On the
                    administrative level, the framework has enabled these improvements in several
                    ways:

                47
First, it moves the assignment focus away from the deliverable and back into the
                    process and the praxis. There are a number of tools that offer sleek final
                    interfaces, but little in the way of customization, and limit the actual
                    learning about publication, research methods, and the technology behind them.
                    The domain, method, and technical objectives should be considered first, with
                    the process and expectations can be determined accordingly. It can be tempting
                    to formulate learning objectives and then jump to the simplest solution to
                    produce a deliverable, abandoning or partially conceding learning objectives in
                    the process. The framework helps us keep these in mind, and also informs grading
                    rubrics that value the demonstration of methods and skills over a shortcut to a
                    presentable deliverable.

                48
Second, this framework is helpful in engaging people who are new to digital
                    research, or even those who are skeptical of its values. Some humanists may be
                    dismissive of digital projects because of the presumption that they are flashy
                    but lacking in substance, while others may be intimidated by the technical work
                    required to make a digital project function effectively. The framework makes it
                    much easier to move beyond conversations that focus too much on the output or
                    the technology and instead focus on the learning that occurs throughout project
                    development. This type of reframing may be obvious to many immersed in digital
                    humanities, but can go a long way toward making digital methods more
                    interesting, valuable, and approachable for those who are new to the field.

                49
Third, the framework serves as an excellent way to start and manage
                    collaborations between faculty, librarians, graduate students, education
                    technology specialists, and others. Conversations between domain specialists
                    with limited digital skills and librarians, programmers, user experience
                    designers, or others who may have knowledge of the technical skills, but little
                    or no background in the domain develop more easily because expectations and
                    needs are clarified. By centering the conversation on clear-cut learning goals,
                    parties can much more easily determine where their own expertise may be valuable
                    to the learning process.

            

            
                Conclusion

                50
Douglas Rushkoff, a Professor of Media Theory and Digital Economics, delivered an
                    oft-cited talk at the 2010 South by Southwest Festival proclaiming that citizens
                    in the imminent future must “program or be programmed”
                         [Rushkoff 2010]. In his book, which gets its title from this proclamation, he wrote of
                    his typical response when people ask him if they really do need to learn to
                    program: 
                        And while I always answer, “Yes, you do have to learn
                                to program,” the real answer is probably no. You don’t. You can
                            get by without becoming a literate participant of the digital age. You
                            may not know what’s going on, you may not have much of an impact on the
                            future of our species, and you may begin to feel like technology knows
                            more about you than you know about it-but no, you don’t have to learn to
                            program.
                         [Rushkoff and Purvis 2011, 7–8]
                    

 While Rushkoff’s response may be a bit facetious, his larger point,
                    articulated throughout his book, is that digital media and technologies are full
                    of decisions made by people, and those decisions have an impact on the everyday
                    lives of others. Without an understanding of how technology works — even a
                    surface level understanding — an individual has reduced agency in their everyday
                    lives. It is the duty of liberal arts educators to ensure that students retain
                    this agency, at least in the ways that they experience media, think critically,
                    and communicate on personal and societal levels.

                51
It is my hope that the framework articulated here will facilitate and aid others
                    to include these crucial skills into their teaching, in much the same way they
                    have long facilitated skill-building and discussion of things like writing,
                    evaluating evidence, and critical thinking. Digital humanities provide an
                    opportunity to integrate the disciplinary study of literature, historical
                    primary sources, and archaeological discoveries with these skills and knowledges
                    for the twenty-first century. The framework here also provides an approach that
                    enables instructors to focus on the core learning outcomes without gravitating
                    towards an easier or more attractive deliverable.

                52
Although the framework was developed within a digital research-oriented lab, the
                    framework can be useful for collaborations between disciplinary faculty,
                    librarians, educational technologists, instructional designers, or graduate
                    students. Educators in the liberal arts must continue to grapple with emerging
                    forms of communication and analysis, or we risk leaving our students lacking in
                    critical areas of the liberal arts. Media and information literacies and
                    multimodal and digital writing skills are essential for effective communication
                    and civic engagement now and in the future, and liberal arts courses must engage
                    with them. This flexible and extensible framework offers one fruitful route, by
                    developing digital humanities projects intended to impart such skills while
                    engaging with domain-specific content.

            

        
        
            
        
    

Notes
[1] 
                    Ryan Cordell has reflected on his experiences with students who find little
                    interest or appeal in “Digital Humanities.” William
                    Pannapacker has argued for the usage of the term “digital liberal
                        arts,” particularly at liberal arts colleges because it is much
                    more inclusive, approachable, and less politicized than digital humanities. For
                    more see [Cordell 2016]
                    [Pannapacker 2013].
[2]  Here I use “liberal arts” to
                        describe the disciplines that are intended to teach broad sets of skills
                        such as writing and communication, social awareness and responsibility,
                        critical thinking, and analytical and problem-solving skills. The
                        terminology comes from the charge that these skills and subjects are
                        essential for all free individuals to take part in civic society. While
                        there is clear overlap with the US model of liberal arts colleges, the term
                        is intended to fit into much broader contexts in humanities, social science,
                        and liberal education.
[3]  This course was taught by Ethan
                                    Watrall in the Department of Anthropology and was supported by
                                    Brian Geyer, a PhD student in Anthropology, with design support
                                    provided by Austin Truchan at Matrix.
[4]  A few examples of emerging resources for data
                            include HathiTrust, University of Pennsylvania Libraries' OPENN,
                            Michigan State University Libraries’ Humanities Data Collection, JSTOR’s
                            Data for Research, and University of North Carolina Chapel Hill
                            Libraries’ DocSouth Data collection.
[5]  Campus Archaeology Field School was
                                    led by Lynne Goldstein of the MSU Department of Archaeology, and
                                    the project was supported by PhD students in Anthropology Katy
                                    Meyers-Emery and Brian Geyer.
[6]  This course was taught by
                                    Helen Veit of the Michigan State Department of History and
                                    supported by History PhD student Liz Timbs.

Works Cited
ACRL 2000 Association of College & Research
                    Libraries (ACRL). “Information Literacy Competency Standards
                        for Higher Education.” 2000. http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/informationliteracycompetency.
ACRL 2015 Association of College & Research
                    Libraries (ACRL). “Framework for Information Literacy for
                        Higher Education,” February 2, 2015. http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/ilframework.
AHA American Historical Association. “AHA History Tuning Project: History Discipline Core.”
                    https://www.historians.org/teaching-and-learning/tuning/history-discipline-core
ALA 2013 American Library Association. “Digital Literacy, Libraries, and Public Policy.” Office
                    for Information Technology Policy’s Digital Literacy Task Force, January
                    2013.
Aghaei 2012 Aghaei, Sareh. “Evolution of the World Wide Web: From Web 1.0 to Web 4.0.”
                    International Journal of Web & Semantic
                        Technology 3, no. 1 (January 31, 2012): 1–10.
                    doi:10.5121/ijwest.2012.3101.
Asher and Duke 2012 Asher, Andrew D., and Lynda M.
                    Duke. “Searching for Answers: Student Research Behavior at
                        Illinois Wesleyan University.” In College
                        Libraries and Student Culture: What We Now Know, 71–86. Chicago:
                    American Library Association, 2012.
Bennett and Maton 2011 Bennett, Sue, and Karl
                    Maton. “Intellectual Field or Faith-Based Religion: Moving
                        on from the Idea of ‘Digital Natives’.” In Deconstructing Digital Natives: Young People, Technology, and
                        the New Literacies, edited by Michael Thomas, 169–86. New York;
                    London: Routledge, 2011.
Berners-Lee and Fischetti 1999 Berners-Lee,
                    Tim, and Mark Fischetti. Weaving the Web: The Original
                        Design and Ultimate Destiny of the World Wide Web by Its Inventor.
                    San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1999.
Brake 2014 Brake, David R. “Are
                        We All Online Content Creators Now? Web 2.0 and Digital Divides.”
                    Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 19, no.
                    3 (April 2014): 591–609. doi:10.1111/jcc4.12042.
Carlson and Johnson 2015 Carlson, Jake, and Lisa
                    Johnston, eds. Data Information Literacy: Librarians, Data,
                        and the Education of a New Generation of Researchers. Purdue
                    Information Literacy Handbooks. West Lafayette, Indiana: Purdue University
                    Press, 2015.
Carlson et al. 2011 Carlson, Jacob, Michael
                    Fosmire, C. C. Miller, and Megan Sapp Nelson. “Determining
                        Data Information Literacy Needs: A Study of Students and Research
                        Faculty.”
                    Portal: Libraries and the Academy 11, no. 2 (2011):
                    629–57. doi:10.1353/pla.2011.0022.
Carlson et al. 2013 Carlson, Jake, Lisa Johnston,
                    Brian Westra, and Mason Nichols. “Developing an Approach for
                        Data Management Education: A Report from the Data Information Literacy
                        Project.”
                    International Journal of Digital Curation 8, no. 1
                    (June 20, 2013): 204–17. doi:10.2218/ijdc.v8i1.254.
Cordell 2016 Cordell, Ryan. “How Not to Teach Digital Humanities” In Debates
                        in the Digital Humanities, edited by Matthew K. Gold and Lauren F.
                    Klein, 2016. http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/87
Dimmock 2013 Dimmock, Nora. “Hallmarks of a Good Paper.” In Studying
                        Students: A Second Look, edited by Nancy Fried Foster. Association
                    of College and Research Libraries, a division of the American Library
                    Association, 2013.
Duggan 2013 Duggan, Maeve. “Photo and Video Sharing Grow Online.” Pew Research Center’s Internet
                    & American Life Project, October 28, 2013. http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/10/28/photo-and-video-sharing-grow-online/.
Duke and Asher 2012 Duke, Lynda M., and Andrew D.
                    Asher, eds. College Libraries and Student Culture: What We
                        Now Know. Chicago: American Library Association, 2012.
Foster 2013 Foster, Nancy Fried. Studying Students: A Second Look. Association of
                    College and Research Libraries, a division of the American Library Association,
                    2013. 
Hargittai and Walejko 2008 Hargittai, Eszter,
                    and Gina Walejko. “The Participation Divide: Content
                        Creation and Sharing in the Digital Age.”
                    Information, Communication & Society 11, no. 2
                    (March 1, 2008): 239–56. doi:10.1080/13691180801946150.
Head 2007 Head, Alison J. “Beyond Google: How Do Students Conduct Academic Research?”
                    First Monday 12, no. 8 (August 6, 2007).
                    doi:10.5210/fm.v12i8.1998.
Head 2013 Head, Alison J. “Project Information Literacy: What Can Be Learned About the
                        Information-Seeking Behavior of Today’s College Students?” By Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL)
                        Proceedings 2013, 2013. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2281511.
Hirsch 2012 Hirsch, Brett D. Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics,
                    2012. http://www.openbookpublishers.com/reader/161.
Hobbs 2010 Hobbs, Renae. “Digital and Media Literacy: A Plan of Action.” The Aspen Institute,
                    2010. http://www.knightfoundation.org/media/uploads/publication_pdfs/Digital_and_Media_Literacy_A_Plan_of_Action.pdf.
Jurafsky et al. 2014 Jurafsky, Dan, Victor
                    Chahuneau, Bryan R. Routledge, and Noah A. Smith. “Narrative
                        Framing of Consumer Sentiment in Online Restaurant Reviews.”
                    First Monday 19, no. 4 (March 23, 2014).
                    doi:10.5210/fm.v19i4.4944. 
Langan et al. 2016 Langan, Debra, Nicole Schott,
                    Timothy Wykes, Justin Szeto, Samantha Kolpin, Carla Lopez, & Nathan Smith.
                        “Students’ use of personal technologys in the university
                        classroom: analyzing the perceptions of the digital generation.”
                    Technology, Pedagogy and Education Vol. 25, No. 1
                    (January 2016): 101-117. doi: 10.1080/1475939X.2015.1120684
Mackey and Jacobson 2014 Mackey, Thomas P, and
                    Trudi E Jacobson. Metaliteracy: Reinventing Information
                        Literacy to Empower Learners, 2014.
Mahony and Pierazzo 2012 Mahony, Simon, and Elena
                    Pierazzo. “Teaching Skills or Teaching Methodology.”
                    In Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and
                        Politics, edited by Brett D Hirsch, 215–17, 2012. http://www.openbookpublishers.com/reader/161.
Padilla et al. 2015 Padilla, Thomas George, Bobby
                    Smiley, Sara Miller, and Hailey Mooney. “Modeling Approaches
                        to Library–Led DH Pedagogy,” 2015. http://dh2015.org/abstracts/xml/PADILLA_Thomas_George_Modeling_Approaches_to_Libr/PADILLA_Thomas_George_Modeling_Approaches_to_Library_le.html.
Pannapacker 2013 Pannapacker, William. “Stop Calling It ‘Digital Humanities'.”
                    The Chronicle of Higher Education, February 18,
                    2013. http://chronicle.com/article/Stop-Calling-It-Digital/137325/.
Perrin and Duggan 2015 Perrin, Andrew, and Maeve
                    Duggan. “Americans’ Internet Access: 2000-2015.” Pew
                    Research Center, June 2015. http://www.pewinternet.org/files/2015/06/2015-06-26_internet-usage-across-demographics-discover_FINAL.pdf.
Prensky 2001 Prensky, Marc. “Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants.”
                    On the Horizon 9, no. 5 (October 2001).
Ramsay 2012 Ramsay, Stephen. “Programming with Humanists: Reflections on Raising an Army of
                        Hacker-Scholars in the Digital Humanities.” In Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics,
                    edited by Brett D Hirsch, 217–41, 2012. http://www.openbookpublishers.com/reader/161.
Rushkoff 2010 Rushkoff, Douglas. “Program or Be Programmed: Ten Commands for a Digital
                        Age.” Austin, TX, March 15, 2010. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=imV3pPIUy1k.
Rushkoff and Purvis 2011 Rushkoff, Douglas, and
                    Leland Purvis. Program or Be Programmed: Ten Commands for a
                        Digital Age. Berkeley, CA: Soft Skull Press, 2011.
Sarada and Foster 2013 George, Sarada, and Nancy
                    Fried Foster. “Understanding How Undergraduates
                        Work.” In Studying Students: A Second
                        Look, edited by Nancy Fried Foster. Association of College and
                    Research Libraries, a division of the American Library Association, 2013. 
Sayers et al. 2016 Sayers, Jentery, Devon Elliot,
                    Kari Kraus, Bethany Nowviskie, and William J. Turkel. “Between Bits and Atoms: Physical Computing and Desktop Fabrication in the
                        Humanities.” In A New Companion to Digital
                        Humanities, edited by Susan Schreibman, Raymond George Siemens, and
                    John Unsworth. Chichester, West Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons Inc,
                    2016.
Schreibman et al. 2016 Schreibman, Susan,
                    Raymond George Siemens, and John Unsworth, eds. A New
                        Companion to Digital Humanities. Chichester, West Sussex, UK: John
                    Wiley & Sons Inc, 2016.
Shorish 2015 Shorish, Yasmeen. “Data Information Literacy and Undergraduates: A Critical
                        Competency.”
                    College & Undergraduate Libraries 22, no. 1
                    (January 2, 2015): 97–106. doi:10.1080/10691316.2015.1001246.
Sinclair and Rockwell 2012 Sinclair, Stefan, and
                    Geoffrey Rockwell. “Teaching Computer-Assisted Text
                        Analysis.” In Digital Humanities Pedagogy:
                        Practices, Principles and Politics, edited by Brett D Hirsch,
                    241–55, 2012. http://www.openbookpublishers.com/reader/161.
Stommel 2014 Stommel, Jesse. “Critical Digital Pedagogy: A Definition.”
                    Hybrid Pedagogy, November 18, 2014. http://www.hybridpedagogy.com/journal/critical-digital-pedagogy-definition/.
Thomas 2011 Thomas, Michael. Deconstructing Digital Natives: Young People, Technology, and the New
                        Literacies. New York; London: Routledge, 2011.
Thomas and Lorang 2014 Thomas, Will and Elizabeth
                    Lorang. “The Other End of the Scale: Rethinking the Digital
                        Experience in Higher Education.”
                    Educause Review. (September 15, 2014). http://er.educause.edu/articles/2014/9/the-other-end-of-the-scale-rethinking-the-digital-experience-in-higher-education
Wickham 2014 Wickham, Hadley. “Tidy Data.”
                    Journal of Statistical Software 59, no. 10 (2014).
                    doi:10.18637/jss.v059.i10.
Wolff et al. 2016 Wolff, Christine, Alisa B. Rod,
                    and Roger C. Schonfeld. “Ithaka S+R US Faculty Survey
                        2015.”
                    Ithaka S+R, April 4, 2016. http://www.sr.ithaka.org/publications/ithaka-sr-us-faculty-survey-2015/.

2017 11.3
             | 
            XML
            | 
            Print Article


Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

 
            URL: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000303/000303.html
Last updated:
            
 Comments: dhqinfo@digitalhumanities.org
 Published by:
            The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
Affiliated with: Literary and Linguistic Computing
 Copyright 2005 - 
[image: Creative Commons License]
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
        


