[image: DHQ Logo]
[image: Digital Humanities Quarterly Logo]

homesubmissionsabout dhqdhq peoplecontact
 




Current Issue
	2017: 11.3

Preview Issue
	2017: 11.4

Previous Issues
	2017: 11.2
	2017: 11.1
	2016: 10.4
	2016: 10.3
	2016: 10.2
	2016: 10.1
	2015: 9.4
	2015: 9.3
	2015: 9.2
	2015: 9.1
	2014: 8.4
	2014: 8.3
	2014: 8.2
	2014: 8.1
	2013: 7.3
	2013: 7.2
	2013: 7.1
	2012: 6.3
	2012: 6.2
	2012: 6.1
	2011: 5.3
	2011: 5.2
	2011: 5.1
	2010: 4.2
	2010: 4.1
	2009: 3.4
	2009: 3.3
	2009: 3.2
	2009: 3.1
	2008: 2.1
	2007: 1.2
	2007: 1.1

Indexes
	 Title
	 Author


[image: sidenavbarimg]ISSN 1938-4122

Announcements
	Call for Reviewers
	Call for Submissions


[image: button1-addthis.gif]

DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly
2017
Volume 11 Number 3
2017 11.3
                     | 
                    XML

| 
		   Discuss
			(
				Comments
			)
                



    
        
            
                
                Methods of quality, quality of methods. What does Roberto Busa
                    have to communicate to digital humanists in the 21st century? From hermeneutics
                    to performativity.

                Marinella Testori <testorimarinella_at_gmail_dot_com>, King's College London

            
            

            
        
        
        
        
     


    
        
            Abstract

                
                Despite being also known as the “Father of Digital Humanities” owing to his
                    pioneering contribution to the application of informatics to the whole ensemble
                    of texts by the medieval philosopher and theologian Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274),
                    the Jesuit Italian priest Roberto Busa (1913-2011) has still not been fully
                    appreciated with regard to his development of a “hermeneutic informatics”
                         [Busa 1999, 5]. Indeed this may represent a key concept to clarify what makes a
                    difference between the common usage of computers in order to speed up
                    procedures, and high-quality practices enhancing the role of informatics in
                    shaping human interaction with machines. In other terms, Busa’s interpretation
                    of informatics may impact not only on the way in which digital resources and
                    tools are developed, but also on the epistemological reflection about Digital
                    Humanities. In this paper, by drawing from many of his texts, I will outline how
                    this innovative “hermeneutics” is explained by Busa in terms of language
                    dynamisms potentially leading to the development of what Johanna Drucker has
                    described as a “humanistic-informed theory of the making of
                            technology”
                         [Drucker 2012, 87].

            

            
        
        
            
            1
In his article titled “What is humanities computing and what is
                    not?”, John Unsworth suggests looking at humanities computing “as a practice of representation”
                     [Unsworth], which he has articulated according to six propositions, among which are
                those concerning “humanities computing as a way of
                    reasoning” and “humanities computing as shaped by the
                    need for human communication”. The basis for these suggestions outlined
                in 2002 may be found in the article “What is a Knowledge
                    Representation?” by Randall Davis, Howard Shrobe and Peter Szolovits,
                which appeared around a decade before in Al Magazine
                and in the light of which Unsworth has developed his considerations: in this
                contribution, in fact, the authors have reasoned about the features of knowledge
                representation, which, among others, they have defined as “a set
                    of ontological commitments”, “a medium for efficient
                    computation” and “a medium of human expression”
                     [Davis, Shrobe, and Szolovits 1993]. 

            2
It is worth noticing that, with their discussion, Davis and colleagues have
                anticipated the current debates regarding what digital humanities is and, more
                specifically, the boundary between a generic, widespread use of computers to do
                things, and computer applications adding value to academic research in humanistic
                disciplines because of their capability of representing human knowledge more
                effectively. Interestingly, in the second half of the twentieth century Roberto Busa
                (1913-2011), the groundbreaking developer of the Index
                    Thomisticus[1], a linguistic corpus for Thomas Aquinas' texts, already proposed ideas with
                the potential to enlighten and steer the contemporary discussion in the field.
                Although Busa is known for having been one of the early pioneers to bring problems
                in language together with computing machinery, his contribution to the development
                of a “hermeneutic informatics”[2] is not so appreciated and recognised. There is the risk of pigeonholing his
                work under constraining labels or confining it only to specific sectors (for
                example, computing techniques applied to ancient languages). It appears to me
                significant, instead, that, since he worked on the development of a linguistic
                corpus, Busa established in this way a vital connection between humanities computing
                and the reflection on language. 

            3
In this article, I am going to outline the salient ideas put into practice by Busa by
                discussing some of his contributions as a common thread. It is not a coincidence
                that in 1998 Busa admonished that “Informatics is already an ocean”
                     [Busa 1999], so we need to be careful not to get lost. For this reason, I also propose
                many quotations from Busa's texts as a deliberate choice to let the reader know many
                worthy reflections provided by the scientist that are not so well-known so as to
                stimulate a debate. At the same time, I will be pointing out how my current
                experience of work on Busa’s legacy is leading me to move ahead with the development
                of new perspectives requiring further consideration. 

            
                Methods of quality: Roberto Busa and the computing in the humanities

                4
In his keynote speech From Punched Cards to Treebanks: 60
                        Years of Computational Linguistics at the Eighth International
                    Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (Milan, 2009), Busa sketched three
                    main typologies of informatics currently in use: “documentaristic” informatics, comprising all the informatic services
                    allowing efficient “information retrieval”; “editorial” informatics, referring to the wide range of
                        “multimedia” devices for reading books, watching
                    films, browsing the Internet; and “hermeneutic
                        informatics”, considering the “computerized text analysis, or language hermeneutics,
                            i.e. interpretation, […] of all our ways of questioning the whys of language”
                         [Busa 1999, 5]. This latter was the informatic typology to which Busa devoted his
                    inexhaustible attention during all his life. The focus on language, according to
                    him, is strictly required by the nature of the relationships between man and
                    computers, which interact by means of specific programming codes. Moreover, “the computer allows and exigently demands, as its
                            specific capacities, an exhaustive, detailed, deep, quantitative
                            knowledge, derived from huge amounts of natural texts”
                         [Busa 1999, 6]. As a consequence, it is arguable that computers and human beings,
                    technological devices and humanities are not competitors or antagonists, but
                    they are potential allies, insofar as they both are “human expressions”
                         [Busa 1999, 6]. Nevertheless, what do we really know about the language (our language)
                    on which human communication is based and by which it is conveyed? Are we really
                    aware of the intrinsic logic, the inner dynamism, and the psychological
                    implications which are put in motion every time we communicate? Roberto Busa
                    defined the “language that [is] unknown”
                         [Busa 1999, 6][3], as
                    signifying that establishing an interaction with the computer/machine implies a
                    more profound level of language awareness than that to which we are accustomed.
                    This raising of consciousness is necessary to introduce consolidated
                    philological and linguistic methods to the “new qualitative dimensions”
                         [Busa 1980] made available by informatics. In the light of this, applying computer
                    methods to the humanities “can help us to be more humanistic than before”
                         [Busa 1980, 89] because it leads us, first, to an inner journey through rational paths
                    triggered by language expression. This conviction mirrors the current debate
                    regarding the necessity of an epistemological reflection on the making of the
                    digital humanities: for example, Stephen Ramsay and Geoffrey Rockwell have
                    recently stated that “the understanding of underlying theoretical claims is
                            the sine qua non of humanistic
                            enquiry”
                         [Ramsay and Rockwell 2012]. Roberto Busa would have certainly confirmed this vision and reasserted
                    that these “underlying theoretical claims” primarily
                    involve language dynamisms and linguistic issues. More specifically, these
                    underlying implications concern the meaning, the “semantics” of words and sentences, which is not attainable by a mere
                    quantitative production of a certain amount of data. Busa claimed that “we do not speak in words but in sentences. A sentence
                            has a global meaning which is not the pure sum of the values of its
                            single components. The heart of this problem is whether we are able to
                            formalise the global meaning of sentences with something less than the
                            whole sentence itself; in other words, whether we can succeed in
                            identifying in each sentence something which can be taken as
                            characteristic of its global meaning”
                         [Busa 1980, 88].

            

            
                Quality of methods: Roberto Busa and the hermeneutics of informatics

                5
According to Busa’s experience, a high-quality methodology in computing for the
                    humanities should be focused on an accurate reflection on communication, because
                    man and computer interact with the help of sophisticated languages which differ
                    from common grammar and syntax and require constant development. Charles L.
                    Isbell et al. have confirmed the language-oriented nature of the interaction
                    established by human beings with the machine and suggested a reciprocal
                    shaping-power of the language on the outside reality (the computer) and,
                        vice versa, of the external world (the
                    computer) to the language itself [Isbell et al. 2009].[4]. A more conscious remark of this
                    communicative essence may contribute to illuminating a controversial point in
                    computing for the humanities: as Johanna Drucker has pointed out, “the challenge is to shift humanistic study from
                            attention to the effects of technology (from readings of
                            social media, games, narrative, personae, digital texts, images,
                            environments), to a humanistic-informed theory of the
                                making of technology”
                         [Drucker 2012]. With respect to this question, Busa's message is that the development of
                    an “informed theory of the making of
                        technology” cannot elude a renewed, unremitting consideration of
                    language features and issues, which, in a kind of virtuous circle, are
                    positively related to the effects of technology on our life. In
                    this sense, the fruit sprouting from the “hermeneutic
                        informatics” to which Busa referred in his last keynote speech From Punched Cards to Treebanks mentioned previously
                    is what I propose to indicate as a language-based hermeneutics of
                        informatics.

            

            
                Moving ahead of Busa: from hermeneutics to performativity

                6
This type of theoretical approach, along with the scepticism Busa expressed
                    regarding possibilities for a machine to fully develop it [Busa 1990][5], clears an unexpected, irreplaceable space for
                    the human role: in fact, although “the computer has even improved the quality of methods
                            in philological analysis, because its brute physical rigidity demands
                            full accuracy, full completeness, full systematicity”
                         [Busa 1980, 88], investigating the meaning of a discourse, as well as the mind processes
                    involved, requires that man instructs the machine to work at this level. 

                7
Busa found in the so-called arbor Porphyrii (the
                        “Porphyrian tree”, suggested by the ancient philosopher Porphyry to
                    explain the Aristotelian Categories[6]), an effective way of representing how the
                    human way of reasoning works. This is perfectly interpreted by the “trees”
                    which constitute a treebank, a linguistic corpus characterised by a specific
                    focus on the relationships between words and sentences. Busa was aware of the
                    difference among the “Porphyrian trees”, expressing “a graduated scalarity of similarities and
                            differences”
                         [Busa 2009][7] among genres and
                    species, and the “treebanks”, illustrating “relations of real and true dependency”
                         [Busa 2009] from a linguistic point of view; nevertheless, he asserts that
                    dependency-trees, provide “a syntax extracted inductively from computerised texts
                            and workable by the computer according to its boundless
                            capacities”
                         [Busa 2009] that is a pedagogically powerful means for clarifying our interior logic
                    and way of thinking and, consequently, of communicating[8].

                8
Building a treebank for the syntactic and semantic annotation of the 11 million
                    words constituting the Index Thomisticus, as it is
                    currently being performed by the Research Group committed to Busa’s legacy with
                    the Index Thomisticus Treebank Project[9], is thus a method of
                    quality par excellence, not only for the
                    enhancement of linguistic properties in a text but also for casting light on
                    some mental paths connected with language. My current experience as annotator of
                    the IT-TB, in fact, has been increasingly persuading me about what I propose to
                    define as the performative nature of linguistic
                        annotation. While working in Busa’s footsteps, I have been practically
                    experiencing first-hand the insights he advanced in From
                        Punched Cards to Treebanks: 60 Years of Computational Linguistics
                    and, at the same time, I have been realizing how these insights can lead us
                    ahead of what Busa himself could not have completely foreseen. The most
                    intriguing fact of annotation of a treebank is that it enables the human
                    annotator to deal with a living, branching and constantly evolving tree. Making
                    a tree live, by establishing relations between words until it has reached its
                    accomplished form, is the amazing vocation I have discovered, since, in the very
                    act of annotating, I can make the text live. It really represents a kind of
                        “making of language,” to recall the title of the
                    book by Mike Beaken, The Making of Language
                    [Beaken 2011], in which is proposed an alternative view of looking
                    at the origins of language, rooted not so much in biological features, rather
                    than in cultural and technological developments. Treebanks, in my vision,
                    represent one of these contemporary, worth exploring and pursuing developments,
                    made available by the advancements of linguistics not only for modern, but also
                    for no-longer spoken languages.

            

            
                Conclusions

                9
Language-based models of interpreting and building a language, along with the
                    development of new technologies in the field of computing applied to the
                    humanities, may represent theoretically and practically valid methods of
                    contributing to the above-quoted challenges explained by Unsworth and Davis.
                    Despite being software-embedded, in fact, these models and related technologies
                    may be able to overcome the inherent limitations (e.g., strong
                    object-orientation) of mere computational approaches not capturing the
                    performative value of human acts of linguistic expression. In addition, owing to
                    our language-shaped minds, they may offer a remedy to that “universal lament about the fragmentation of
                            knowledge” [Busa 2009] that Busa ascertained,
                    because “the human hunger for syntheses derived from
                            microanalysis, continues to surge up, and not only in technologies, but
                            also in linguistics, philosophy, psychology and theology” [Busa 2009] — in other words, in the context of general
                    human knowledge.

            

        
        
            

        
    

Notes
[1]  See the website http://www.corpusthomisticum.org/it/index.age
                
[2]  This expression was
                    used by Roberto Busa himself in his keynote speech, “From
                        Punched Cards to Treebanks: 60 Years of Computational Linguistics, in Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on
                            Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, 4-5
                            December 2009, Milan”
                    [Busa 2009]. The full text of the intervention is not available in
                    the Proceedings, but it can be acquired through the C.I.R.C.S.E., Centro
                    Interdisciplinare di Ricerche per la Computerizzazione dei Segni
                    dell’Espressione, at the Catholic University of Milan (Italy), http://centridiricerca.unicatt.it/circse_index.html?rdeLocaleAttr=en.
                
[3] 
                        “Language that unknown” is a literal translation
                        from Italian. The meaning is that, generally, we do not have a full,
                        conscious awareness of the language in all its components.
[4] 
                        “The computing machine or artifact is typically
                            manipulated through some language that provides a combination of
                            symbolic representation of the features, objects, and states of interest
                            as well as a visualization of transformations and interactions that can
                            be directly compared and aligned with those in the world. The centrality
                            of the machine makes computing models inherently executable or
                            automatically manipulable and, in part, distinguishes computing from
                            mathematics. Therefore, the computationalist acts as an intermediary
                            between models, machines, and languages and prescribes objects, states,
                            and processes”.
[5] 
                        “Language is living, open and continually evolving. It
                            is in tune with everything that is beautiful and new. Consequently, the
                            epistemological methodologies of mathematical and physical sciences,
                            which measure quantifiable physical entities, are not sufficient to
                            dominate and grasp the logic of the signs we use to communicate
                            knowledge”.
[6]  For a
                        first, general information regarding the “Porphyrian Tree” see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Porphyrian_tree . See also what is
                        proposed about “Transcendentals and Predication” in [Goris and Aertsen 2013].
[7]  The word “scalarity” appears in the original text, but the
                        most proper term here would be “scale”.
[8] 
                        “Dependency trees are very useful and very educative.
                            They train us in an internal ‘speleology’ on our own logic, which
                            in each of us is the spiritual centre of our own personal consistency
                            and dignity. ‘Knowing yourself’ is a process that is never really
                            exhausted”.
[9] The
                        website of the Index Thomisticus Treebank
                        Project is http://itreebank.marginalia.it/.

Works Cited
Beaken 2011 Beaken, Mike. 2011. The Making of Language. Edinburgh: Dunedin
                    Academic.
Busa 1980 Busa, Roberto. 1980. “The Annals of Humanities Computing: The Index Thomisticus”. Computers and the Humanities 14: 83–90.
Busa 1990 Busa, Roberto. 1990. “Informatics and New Philology”. Computers and
                        the Humanities 24: 339-343.
Busa 1999 Busa, Roberto. 1999. “Picture a Man…Busa Award Lecture, Debrecen, Hungary, 6 July 1998”.
                        Literary and Linguistic Computing 14:
                    5-9.
Busa 2009 Busa, Roberto. “From
                        Punched Cards to Treebanks: 60 Years of Computational Linguistics”.
                    In Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on
                        Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, 4-5 December
                        2009, Milan. Edited by Marco Passarotti, Adam Przepiórkowski, Savina
                    Raynaud and Frank Van Eynde, http://convegni.unicatt.it/meetings_Proceedings_TLT8.pdf
                
Davis, Shrobe, and Szolovits 1993 Davis, Randall,
                    Howard Shrobe, and Peter Szolovits. “What is a Knowledge
                        Representation?”. 1993. AI Magazine 14:
                    17-33, http://groups.csail.mit.edu/medg/ftp/psz/k-rep.html
                
Drucker 2012 Drucker, Johanna. “Humanistic Theory and Digital Scholarship”. 2012. In
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities, edited by
                    Matthew K. Gold. Minneapolis/London: University of Minnesota Press, http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/34
                
Goris and Aertsen 2013 Goris, Wouter, and Aertsen,
                    Jan. 2013. “Medieval Theories of Transcendentals”.
                        The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited
                    by Edward N. Zalta, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/transcendentals-medieval/
Isbell et al. 2009 Isbell, Charles L., Lynn Andrea
                    Stein, Robb Cutler, Jeffrey Forbes, Linda Fraser, John Impagliazzo, Viera
                    Proulx, Steve Russ, Richard Thomas, and Yan Xu. 2009. “(Re)Defining Computing Curricula by (Re)Defining Computing”. SIGCSE Bulletin 41, 4: 195–207, http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~isbell/papers/p195-isbell.pdf
                
Ramsay and Rockwell 2012 Ramsay, Stephen, and
                    Geoffrey Rockwell. 2012. “Developing Things: Notes toward an
                        Epistemology of Building in the Digital Humanities”. In Debates in the Digital Humanities, edited by Matthew
                    K. Gold. Minneapolis/London: University of Minnesota Press, http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/part/3
                
Unsworth Unsworth, John. What
                        is Humanities Computing and What is Not?. http://computerphilologie.uni-muenchen.de/jg02/unsworth.html
                

2017 11.3
             | 
            XML
            | 
            Print Article


Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

 
            URL: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000329/000329.html
Last updated:
            
 Comments: dhqinfo@digitalhumanities.org
 Published by:
            The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
Affiliated with: Literary and Linguistic Computing
 Copyright 2005 - 
[image: Creative Commons License]
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
        


