
    
    

    
        
            
                
                    NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please upgrade your browser.
                    LEARN MORE »
                
            

        

    




    
    
    
        
            Sections
            
                Home
            
            Search
            Skip to content
                        Skip to navigation
                                    View mobile version
                    

        
            
                
                    The New York Times
                
            

            
        

                
            Archives|BOOKS OF THE TIMES;Seeking Salvation On the Silver Screen

        

        
            



            





            Search
            
                Subscribe Now
                Log In
                                                0
                Settings
            

        

    

    
    Close search
    
    Site Search Navigation

    
        
            
                                Search NYTimes.com
                            

            
                                
                
                Clear this text input
                
                    

                

                Go
            

        

    






    

https://nyti.ms/297DCQ9
            
    
        	
                Loading...

            


        
            
                See next articles
                
                    

                

            
            
                See previous articles
                
                    

                

            
        

    




        
    Site Navigation




    Site Mobile Navigation



    

    
        
    
    Advertisement






        
        
    
        
                        
                Archives
                |
                1996            

                        BOOKS OF THE TIMES;Seeking Salvation On the Silver Screen

            
                                            

By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

                                        
                    
Continue reading the main story
Share This Page

Continue reading the main story




                                                                                

                        

        

    
    
    
            
        
            
                [image: The article as it originally appeared.]
                
                    
                    
                        View page in TimesMachine

                    

                

            
        

        
             , Page 00001 The New York Times Archives
        
    

IN THE BEAUTY OF THE LILIES By John Updike 491 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.95.    YEARS ago, in one of his glittering essays, John Updike wrote of his admiration for novels that "give us, through the consciousness of characters, a  geography amplified by history, a chunk of the planet."
Up until now, the chunk of planet Mr. Updike has chosen to explore himself -- 20th-century America, as colonized by the middle class -- has been most knowingly and most intimately chronicled in his Rabbit novels, a quartet of books that gave us four decades of American life as seen through the experiences of a high school basketball star turned car salesman, Harry (Rabbit) Angstrom.
Now, in his dazzling new novel, "In the Beauty of the Lilies," Mr. Updike takes on an even more daunting project: to chart the fortunes of an American family through four generations and some 80 years, and in doing so, create a portrait of the country, from its nervous entry into the 20th century to its stumbling approach to the millennium.
"In the Beauty of the Lilies" -- which takes its clumsy title from a line in  "The Battle Hymn of the Republic" -- is not only Mr. Updike's most ambitious novel to date, but arguably his finest: a big, generous book, narrated with Godlike omniscience and authority and populated by a wonderfully vivid cast of dreamers, wimps, social climbers, crackpots and lost souls, a book that forces us to reassess the American Dream and the crucial role that faith (and the longing for faith) has played in shaping the national soul.

    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story


Religion, of course, has rumbled through the pages of Mr. Updike's fiction from the start, from books like "The Poorhouse Fair" and "A Month of Sundays" through "Couples" and "Roger's Version." Most of Mr. Updike's heroes feel themselves torn between their spiritual aspirations and their fleshly compulsions, between their yearning for redemption and their dark suspicion that no meaning exists. Like Henry Bech, they worry that they are nothing but "a fleck of dust condemned to know it is a fleck of dust." Like the witches of Eastwick, they see that "the outside of things was sunshine and scatter" while "the inside of everything was death."
        Continue reading the main story
    

    
    




    
    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story
    






    
        These existential anxieties culminate in the opening pages of "The Lilies," when the progenitor of Mr. Updike's American family, the Rev. Clarence Arthur Wilmot, suffers an acute spiritual crisis. It is 1910, and at 2 o'clock one fine spring afternoon in Paterson, N.J., Clarence feels "the last particles of his faith leave him" forever. The loss comes as a palpable, physical sensation, and  it leaves Clarence adrift in a universe suddenly rendered empty and devoid of hope.
A Presbyterian minister by vocation, Clarence realizes that his loss of faith will have worldly consequences for his family as well: namely, the loss of their parish-owned house and their social standing in the community. In fact, employment for a lapsed minister is hard to come by, and Clarence soon finds himself going door-to-door hawking cheap encyclopedias: items he regards as vaguely blasphemous products, "a commercially inspired attempt to play God, by creating in print a replica of Creation." In his free time, Clarence goes to the movies, where he watches the world being created anew in newsreels and features  and shorts.
Clarence's youngest son, Teddy, inherits his sense of defeat, his desire to survive "this vale of tears" with "minimal damage." Though he suspects that "the only way to be an American" is to go out into the world and compete, he prefers  to sit at home "collecting innocent things -- stamps from foreign countries that gave pieces of paper the power to fly around the globe." He will eventually become a postman in the small Delaware town of Basingstoke.
Teddy is defiant in only one area: he cannot forgive God for failing to give  his father, Clarence, a sign, some small encouragement that might have enabled him to hold on to his elusive faith. The closest Teddy ever expects to come to a religious experience is the blinding realization that he should forsake his flailing efforts to pursue a career in New York, and instead return home and marry his old sweetheart, Emily, a pretty girl with a clubfoot who shares his sense of diminished expectations.
It is Teddy and Emily's beautiful daughter, Essie, who approaches life -- and faith -- with supreme self-confidence, an attitude of entitlement that enables her to glide from experience to experience, undamaged by disappointment or fear  or ordinary mortal doubt. Convinced of her own perfection, Essie leaves Basingstoke for a modeling career in New York, and from New York makes the leap  to Hollywood, where she becomes, however briefly, a screen goddess on a par with Grace Kelly, Rita Hayworth and Doris Day. She stars in movies with Clark Gable,  Bing Crosby and William Holden, racks up a series of disappointing marriages and in 1959 gives birth to a son named Clark.

    Newsletter Sign Up

    Continue reading the main story
        
        
    
    
        
            
                Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.

                Invalid email address. Please re-enter.

                You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.

            

            
                
                Sign Up
            

        

        
            
                
            

            
                You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.
            

        

        

    

    
        Thank you for subscribing.

        An error has occurred. Please try again later.

        You are already subscribed to this email.

        View all New York Times newsletters.

    

    	See Sample
	Manage Email Preferences
	Not you?
	Privacy Policy
	Opt out or contact us anytime


    




For Essie (or Alma, as she has become known in the business), God is simply a benign heavenly presence, dedicated to fulfilling her wishes. For her, the Protestant work ethic has become simple ambition, while faith has devolved into  a kind of good luck charm, a token of her belief in her own (and America's) manifest destiny.
Faith does not come so easily to Essie's son, Clark, though he has inherited  her yearning for purpose and her talent for self-reinvention. After years of drifting vaguely through the movie business, Clark winds up in Colorado, where a pretty young woman named Hannah introduces him to Jesse Smith, a David Koresh-like cult leader who preaches an apocalyptic doctrine of sin, salvation and wrath.
Clark, who is rechristened Esau at the commune, doesn't completely buy Jesse's preaching, but he's interested in sleeping with Hannah and in participating in something that sets him apart from his famous mother. His decision to join Jesse's cult will later make headlines, when a bloody, Waco-like showdown with the police ensues.

    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story


Although Mr. Updike credits a huge number of books (including "Mad Man in Waco" by Brad Bailey and Bob Darden, "Inside the Cult" by Marc Breault and Martin King, "The Story of Cinema" by David Shipman, and "Grace" by Robert Lacey) as source material for his saga of the Wilmots, there is nothing the least bit forced or contrived about his use of this information. Unlike his last novel, "Brazil" (1994), which read like a hastily assembled compendium of undigested material, "The Lilies" possesses the hard, diamond radiance of a fully imagined work of art.
While seamlessly weaving the private travails of his characters into the public tapestry of history, Mr. Updike has also managed to endow them with a genuine sense of familial history, subtly showing us how emotions, habits and weaknesses are handed down generation to generation, like expensive, fragile antiques. We see how Essie mistakes her grandfather's sad, broken faith for something saintlike and divine, and how her son in turn mistakes passion and anger for true belief.
We see how the Wilmots' cranky individualism propels them out of a small town in the East into the wide, open spaces of the West, and how their sense of apartness -- that "floating sensation" that "there was nowhere in mankind" where they comfortably fit -- leads to achievement, pain and grief.
While the presiding image of "Rabbit Redux" (1971) was the moonshot in all its hope and glory, the informing metaphor of "The Lilies" is a more ambiguous one: the metaphor of the movies, which are for Mr. Updike's characters a secular substitute for religion, promising eternal life (on celluloid) in place of real  redemption, narrative order in place of Calvinist predestination.
In tracing the history of the Wilmot family, from Clarence, who trades the pulpit for an anonymous seat in a dark theater, to Clark, who becomes the star in a bloody shootout shown on the evening news, Mr. Updike has written an important and impressive novel: a novel that not only shows how we live today, but also how we got there.

    
                        
                
            We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports,
        and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.

        

    	
        A version of this review appears in print on January 12, 1996, on Page C00001 of the National edition with the headline: BOOKS OF THE TIMES;Seeking Salvation On the Silver Screen.   Today's Paper|Subscribe




    

    
        Continue reading the main story
    

    
    



    
        
    
    

    	
	
	
	





    



    What's Next

    
        
            Loading...

        

    






           
 



                    

            
            
    
        Go to Home Page »

        
            Site Index
            
                The New York Times
            
        

        
    

    
        Site Index Navigation

        

                                                        
                    
                        News

                        	
                                        World
                                    
	
                                        U.S.
                                    
	
                                        Politics
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.
                                    
	
                                        Business
                                    
	
                                        Tech
                                    
	
                                        Science
                                    
	
                                        Health
                                    
	
                                        Sports
                                    
	
                                        Education
                                    
	
                                        Obituaries
                                    
	
                                        Today's Paper
                                    
	
                                        Corrections
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Opinion

                        	
                                        Today's Opinion
                                    
	
                                        Op-Ed Columnists
                                    
	
                                        Editorials
                                    
	
                                        Op-Ed Contributors
                                    
	
                                        Letters
                                    
	
                                        Sunday Review
                                    
	
                                        Video: Opinion
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Arts

                        	
                                        Today's Arts
                                    
	
                                        Art & Design
                                    
	
                                        Books
                                    
	
                                        Dance
                                    
	
                                        Movies
                                    
	
                                        Music
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Television
                                    
	
                                        Theater
                                    
	
                                        Video: Arts
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Living

                        	
                                        Automobiles
                                    
	
                                        Crossword
                                    
	
                                        Food
                                    
	
                                        Education
                                    
	
                                        Fashion & Style
                                    
	
                                        Health
                                    
	
                                        Jobs
                                    
	
                                        Magazine
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Real Estate
                                    
	
                                        T Magazine
                                    
	
                                        Travel
                                    
	
                                        Weddings & Celebrations
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Listings & More

                        	
                                        Reader Center
                                    
	
                                        Classifieds
                                    
	
                                        Tools & Services
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Multimedia
                                    
	
                                        Photography
                                    
	
                                        Video
                                    
	
                                        NYT Store
                                    
	
                                        Times Journeys
                                    
	
                                        Subscribe
                                    
	
                                        Manage My Account
                                    
	
                                        NYTCo
                                    


                    


                            
            
                
Subscribe


	Subscribe
	
        
                    Home Delivery
            
	
        
                    Digital Subscriptions
            
	
        
        Crossword
    



	
        Email Newsletters
    
	
        Alerts
    
	
                    Gift Subscriptions
            
	
                    Group Subscriptions
            
	
                    Education Rate
            


	
        Mobile Applications
    
	
                    Replica Edition
            


            


        


    



            
    
        Site Information Navigation

         	
                
                    © 2018 The New York Times Company



	Home
	Search
	Accessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.
	Contact Us
	Work With Us
	Advertise
	Your Ad Choices
	Privacy
	Terms of Service
	Terms of Sale


    
    
        Site Information Navigation

        	Site Map
	Help
	Site Feedback
	Subscriptions


    

        
    
    
            
    


    



















