
  
    Skip to main content
  

    
  

          
        
            
  
  [bookmark: /][image: ]


  
  
      Main menu

  
  	Home
	About
	SIGs
	Publications
	Conference
	Awards
	Committees
	News
	Resources


  
        

      

    
    
      

        

                      

              
                              

                                      ADHO

                  
                  
                

              
            

          
          
        

      

    


    
    
    
    
      

        
          

            
              

                
                

                  
                  
                    

                      
                      
                      
                                              
                          
                            About                          

                        
                      
                      
                      
                      
                          
  
  
  

    
              

        
        
      
        
    
        The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO) is an umbrella organisation whose goals are to promote and support digital research and teaching across arts and humanities disciplines, drawing together humanists engaged in digital and computer-assisted research, teaching, creation, dissemination, and beyond, in all areas reflected by its diverse membership. ADHO supports initiatives for publication, presentation, collaboration, and training; recognises and supports excellence in these endeavours; and acts as an community-based consultative and advisory force. In doing so, ADHO embraces and coordinates activity across its constituent organisations: the European Association for Digital Humanities (EADH, founded in 1973 as the Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing), the Association for Computers and the Humanities (ACH, founded in 1978), the Canadian Society for Digital Humanities / Société canadienne des humanités numériques (CSDH/SCHN, founded in 1986 as the Consortium for Computers in the Humanities / Consortium pour ordinateurs en sciences humaines), centerNet, the Australasian Association for Digital Humanities  (aaDH), the Japanese Association for Digital Humanites (JADH), and Humanistica, L'association francophone des humanités numériques/digitales.

Members in ADHO societies are those at the forefront of areas such as textual analysis, electronic publication, document encoding, textual studies and theory, new media studies and multimedia, digital libraries, applied augmented reality, interactive gaming, and beyond. We are researchers and lecturers in humanities computing and in academic departments such as English, History, French, Modern Languages, Philosophy, Theatre, Music, Computer Science, and Visual Arts. We are resource specialists working in libraries, archival centres, and with humanities computing groups. We are academic administrators, and members of the private and public sectors. We are independent scholars, students, graduate students, and research assistants. We are from countries in every hemisphere.

ADHO organizations offer several membership options, including standard membership (which includes a print subscription to Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, formerly LLC), membership only society fee (which does not include the DSH/LLC subscription), senior rate, student rate, and developing country rate. You may also select joint membership in all of the ADHO organizations.

Frequently Asked Questions about ADHO membership are answered here.


	ADHO Constituent Organizations

The following organizations are current members of ADHO:

	
		Australasian Association for Digital Humanities (aaDH)
	
		Association for Computers and the Humanities (ACH)
	
		Canadian Society for Digital Humanities / Société canadienne des humanités numériques (CSDH/SCHN)
	
		centerNet
	
		The European Association for Digital Humanities (EADH)
	
		Japanese Association for Digital Humanites (JADH)
	
		Humanistica, L'association francophone des humanités numériques/digitales (Humanistica)


	ADHO Governance Structure

The Alliance for Digital Humanities Organizations is led by a steering committee which handles general strategy and administration of the organization. Its voting members come from each of the seven constituent, regional members of ADHO. Non-voting members are elected officers, chairs from ADHO’s other committees, the ADHO affiliated journal editors, and chairs of the Special Interest Groups. ADHO also uses committees to support its primary activities. These include the Admissions Committee, the Awards Committee, the Conference Coordinating Committee, the Communications Committee, the Infrastructure Committee, the Multilingualism/ Multiculturalism Committee, the Program Committee, and the Publications Committee.

ADHO's Governance Protocol is available here.


	History of ADHO

The effort to establish ADHO began in Tuebingen, at the ALLC/ACH conference in 2002: a Steering Committee was appointed at the ALLC/ACH meeting in 2004, in Gothenburg, Sweden. At the 2005 meeting in Victoria, the executive committees of the ACH and ALLC approved the governance and conference protocols and nominated their first representatives to the ‘official’ ADHO Steering Committee and various ADHO standing committees. The 2006 conference was the first Digital Humanities conference. In 2007, the ADHO Steering Committee voted to enfranchise The Society for Digital Humanities / Société pour l'étude des médias interactifs (SDH-SEMI, now CSDH/SCHN; founded in 1986 as the Consortium for Computers in the Humanities / Consortium pour ordinateurs en sciences humaines). In 2012, centerNet and the Australasian Association for Digital Humanities  (aaDH) became full constituent organizations in ADHO, followed in January 2013 by the Japanese Association for Digital Humanites (JADH) and Humanistica, L'association francophone des humanités numériques/digitales (Humanistica) in 2016. The Stichting ADHO Foundation (established in the Netherlands in 2013) serves as the legal entity for ADHO. 


	Logo

The ADHO logo is available here as an EPS vector image.




    


    
    
  



  

                      


                      
                    

                  


                

                
              

            


                          
  
  
      Search form

    
  Search 
 











  

  
      Current Issue of DHCommons Journal

  
  
        
  
  
      
        
      
          From Documents to Structured Data:  First Milestones of the `Garzoni'   
  

  
      
          GO::DH Translation Toolkit  
  

  
      
          Creating a Digital Community Radio Station in an informal Refugee Camp in Calais, France  
  

    

  
  
  
  
  
  



  
  
      Advance Issue of Digital Scholarship in the Humanities (formerly LLC)

  
  
        
  
  
      
        
      
          Attesting similarity: Supporting the organization and study of art image collections with computer vision  
  

  
      
          Rho-grams and rho-sets: Significant links in the web of words  
  

  
      
          Christopher Marlowe: Hype and Hoax  
  

    

  
  
  
  
  
  



  
  
      Advance Issue of Digital Humanities Quarterly (DHQ)

  
  
        
  
  
      
        
      
          Introducción de los
                    editoresEditors'
                    Introduction  
  

  
      
          Cartografías de la sociedad
                    redCartographies of the Network
                    Society  
  

  
      
          Laboratorios ciudadanos y humanidades
                    digitalesCitizen Laboratories and Digital
                    Humanities  
  

  
      
          Geografías digitales: Iluminando las relaciones
                    espaciales en una colección de blogs
                    literariosDigital Geographies: Illuminating Spatial
                    Relationships in a Collection of Literary Blogs  
  

  
      
          Retorno a trazos de mil
                    historiasA Return to the Traces of a Thousand
                    Stories  
  

    

  
  
  
  
  
  



  



          

        


      

    


    
          
        
          
          
            
                
  
  [image: ADHO logo]

 



  



                
      ADHO Constituent Organizations

  
  The European Association for Digital Humanities (EADH), Association for Computers and the Humanities (ACH), Canadian Society for Digital Humanities / Société canadienne des humanités numériques (CSDH/SCHN), centerNet, Australasian Association for Digital Humanities (aaDH), Japanese Association for Digital Humanities (JADH), Humanistica, L'association francophone des humanités numériques/digitales (Humanistica)



  


            

            
                
      Contact

  
  Contact form

Email: web@digitalhumanities.org

Google+ | Facebook | Twitter | YouTube | Events Calendar



  


                
  
  [image: Creative Commons Attribution License]

	This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License.



  



            

          

        

      

    
    
  



  