[image: DHQ Logo]
[image: Digital Humanities Quarterly Logo]

homesubmissionsabout dhqdhq peoplecontact
 




Current Issue
	2017: 11.3

Preview Issue
	2017: 11.4

Previous Issues
	2017: 11.2
	2017: 11.1
	2016: 10.4
	2016: 10.3
	2016: 10.2
	2016: 10.1
	2015: 9.4
	2015: 9.3
	2015: 9.2
	2015: 9.1
	2014: 8.4
	2014: 8.3
	2014: 8.2
	2014: 8.1
	2013: 7.3
	2013: 7.2
	2013: 7.1
	2012: 6.3
	2012: 6.2
	2012: 6.1
	2011: 5.3
	2011: 5.2
	2011: 5.1
	2010: 4.2
	2010: 4.1
	2009: 3.4
	2009: 3.3
	2009: 3.2
	2009: 3.1
	2008: 2.1
	2007: 1.2
	2007: 1.1

Indexes
	 Title
	 Author


[image: sidenavbarimg]ISSN 1938-4122

Announcements
	Call for Reviewers
	Call for Submissions


[image: button1-addthis.gif]

DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly
2017
Volume 11 Number 3
2017 11.3
                     | 
                    XML

| 
		   Discuss
			(
				Comments
			)
                



    
        
            
                A Pedagogy for Computer-Assisted Literary Analysis:
                    Introducing GALGO (Golden Age Literature Glossary
                    Online) 

                Nuria Alonso García <nalonsog_at_providence_dot_edu>, Providence College

                Alison Caplan <acaplan_at_providence_dot_edu>, Providence College

                Brad Mering <brad_dot_mering_at_gmail_dot_com>, Mervideo

            
            

            
        
        
        
        
     


    
        
            Abstract

                
                This paper describes a digital teaching application that approaches the study of
                    language and literary works from a social semiotic perspective and represents an
                    innovative pedagogical model for world language and literature classes. The
                    Golden Age Literature Glossary Online, known by the acronym GALGO, consists of an online glossary of select keywords, from
                    canonical texts of Golden Age Spanish literature, whose multiple connotations
                    illuminate important linguistic and social concepts of the 16th and 17th
                    centuries. GALGO incorporates British cultural
                    historian Raymond Williams’ methodology in his Keywords: A
                        Vocabulary of Culture and Society: namely, identifying problem-laden
                    words or “keywords,” charting their distinct usages
                    across texts, and reflecting critically on clusters of associated words. GALGO seeks to instantiate language as social semiotic
                    by linking the semantic configurations of a literary work simultaneously to the
                    cultural environment, the linguistic system, and the social system. Applying the
                    conceptual design of M.A.K. Halliday’s social semiotic model, GALGO’s interpretive apparatus provides the field of discourse or context of situation for the text
                    in which a specific keyword appears. The field of
                        discourse presents clusters, word groupings of semiotic affinity that
                    describe the social action that is taking place in the text. GALGO also performs an interpretation of the tenor of discourse, highlighting sociological variables
                    connected to class status, gender role and racial category that refine a
                    keyword’s meaning from the perspective of interpersonal relationships. Finally,
                        GALGO adds commentary on
                    discursive structures, such as patterns of grammar, syntactic nuances, and
                    figurative language, that surround the keyword in the text.

                GALGO’s strength resides in the synchronic
                    connectivity that the system facilitates when identifying the constellation of
                    meanings for any given keyword. From a technical perspective, the system has the
                    ability to efficiently identify the absolute position of all uses of a keyword
                    across multiple texts, so that large texts can be managed and search times
                    minimized for both users and system administrators. GALGO is constructed in such a way that users can not only access
                    existing analysis within the database, but also can assume, when instructed to
                    do so, the role of the system administrator and contribute their own
                    annotations. A team of faculty and student administrators are currently building
                    the database with research previously collected in Spanish Golden Age literature
                    seminars. Providence College students have utilized the social semiotic
                    methodology underlying GALGO for several years now
                    with successful outcomes both in terms of their growth as language majors and
                    critical thinkers.

            

            
        
        
            
                “If teaching is largely about faculty-student interaction,
                        then we have to recognize that human interaction is changing.”
                     [Bowen 2012, 49]
            

            
                “New tools that foster new insights into work with the ever
                        increasing amount of digital data available to us are not a luxury but a
                        necessity: who better to develop them than humanists who have both a
                        knowledge of the content domain and of the content as data.”
                     [Schreibman and Hanlon 2010, 41]
            

            
            1
The dialogue between the digital and the humanities has not been fluid and continues
                to raise skepticism among a majority of humanists in this third decade since the
                advent of the field of Digital Humanities (DH). A primary concern is the ready
                appropriation of empiricist rather than humanistic methods of inquiry in the
                creation of DH tools. Johanna Drucker is among the most vocal in lamenting that
                computer generated humanities scholarship, by in large, seeks “positivistic, strictly quantitative, mechanistic, reductive and literal”
                scientific ends, and undermines the humanities’ “constructivist approach to knowledge as knowing, observer
                        dependent, emergent, and process-driven rather than entity-defined”
                     [Drucker 2012]. DH scholars are creating, with powerful platforms that support large corpus
                processing, data mining and modeling, ever more complex and innovative projects that
                nonetheless mute, in Drucker’s view, the core critical principles and affective
                experiences that have traditionally lay at the heart of work in the humanities. 

            2
The subject of this paper, GALGO (Golden Age Literature Glossary Online) was developed with a humanistic
                method of inquiry in mind and may resolve the issues raised by Drucker and offer new
                pedagogical insights into computer-assisted reading and analysis of texts. The
                potential benefits of the introduction of instructional platforms such as GALGO within the larger field of Digital Humanities, are
                multiple: 1) a wide variety of small scale digital text analysis projects, like
                those suggested on the MLA Commons site, “Literary Studies in
                    the Digital Age,” can be developed for classroom use and then elaborated
                on if proven to be of value, 2) students, more adept at using digital technology,
                will be able to contribute in significant ways to tool development [Clement 2013, 11] and to engage in professional scholarship
                mentored by faculty [Inman Berens 2014, 6–7], and 3) the role that
                the cultural canon performs within local and global societies can be more broadly
                and effectively explored, enabling the humanities discipline to undergo a much
                needed change.

            3
In the domain of digital text analysis, Franco Moretti’s celebrated “distant
                    reading” model seems to bear out the same epistemological divide discussed
                above. Illuminating and potentially canon busting, the manipulation of massive
                datasets suggests more innovative means by which to evaluate formal and generic
                literary conventions, but involves “a little pact with the devil: we know how to read texts,
                        now let’s learn how not to read them”
                     [Moretti 2013, 48]. At the same time a hybrid approach, that combines distant reading practices
                with close or “traditional” ones, as we adopted in GALGO, is spawning new non-empirical interpretive
                paradigms in which (machine) computational methods and (human) qualitative analyses
                interact dynamically to explore “new ways of reading or, just as important, new
                        understandings of how we have always read”
                     [Liu 2012, 14–15]. Web-based text analysis and visualization tools are being reimagined as
                vehicles that allow scholars to perform a range of hermeneutical and creative
                functions, from instantiating dominant literary-critical theories [[Ramsey and Rockwell 2012]; [Clement 2013]; [Olsen 1993-1994]] to “playing with” or altering a text’s language and
                form [Sinclair 2003]. 

            4
The impulse to bridge distant and close reading strategies emerges naturally in 21st century college and high school classrooms, where
                educators must respond to the ubiquitous use of technology by students, their
                shorter reading span [Hayles 2010] and their need for distraction.
                When genuinely affected by the material, today’s learners also exhibit a capacity
                for disciplined reading and study, “Young people in online forums are engaging in close reading
                        activities directed toward popular music or cult television shows sometimes
                        engaging in prolonged and impassioned debate about what such works mean and
                        how they convey their meanings”
                     [Jenkins and Kelley 2013, 514]. The goal in the college classroom should not be to allow for open-ended
                digital play and exploration of the kind that professional humanities scholars are
                motivated to undertake, because as one learner noted, “The amount of information can truly be overwhelming, and a
                        large part of the success of this exercise seems to lie in not only how to
                        use the [digital] tools to the best advantage, but in…avoiding
                        dead-ends”
                     [Fyfe 2011, 87]. The pedagogical objective, then, is to foster curated opportunities for
                students in the humanities to engage in theoretically informed learning that takes
                full advantage of new media methods [Drucker 2012]
                [Brier 2012]. As instructors, we can play an important role in
                ensuring that they get a critical vocabulary for thinking about the intersections
                between media, language and culture [Jenkins and Kelley 2013, 639] and they
                interact with literary texts meaningfully. 

            5
In this paper we first introduce readers to GALGO’s
                social semiotic model for digital literary analysis, then we describe in detail
                    GALGO’s technical apparatus and illustrate its
                functionality, and lastly we discuss multimodal literacy and reflect on GALGO’s potential to engage 21st century learners in classic literary analysis. 

            
                1. A Social Semiotic Model for Digital Literary Analysis: Accessing the
                    Language of Golden Age Spanish Culture

                6
With increasing frequency over the last decade, students in our foreign language
                    literature classes remark that they often find it difficult to relate to terms
                    and themes in the canonical works that they are studying since they perceive
                    them as obsolete and irrelevant. Students want to read literature that reflects
                    their concerns and that offers them ways to address those concerns from varied
                    perspectives. The main pedagogical challenge, then, lies in guiding students to
                        “see” the interconnectedness between early modern and
                    contemporary language usage at the semantic and syntactic levels. 

                7
Our research has demonstrated that the keyword analysis developed by British
                    cultural historian Raymond Williams provides a particularly amenable approach
                    for engaging students in the study of foreign language and literature, honing in
                    as it does on charged social and political terms that span societies and time
                    periods [Alonso García and Caplan 2014]. Williams’ methodology, namely, identifying
                    problem-laden words or “keywords,” interpreting their meanings in various
                    contexts, and reflecting critically on clusters of associated words, serves to
                    bring to the fore in any text an array of linguistic and historical questions to
                    be researched and discussed. The keyword sociolinguistic framework allows for “an exploration of the vocabulary of a crucial area of
                            social and cultural discussion, which has been inherited within precise
                            historical and social conditions and which has to be made at once
                            conscious and critical – subject to change as well as to
                            continuity”
                         [Williams 1983, 24]. Keywords are “large words”
                         [Hart et al. 2005, 5] that are polysemic, used often and in at least two different situational
                    contexts, and “patterned towards important social ends”
                         [Halliday and Hasan 1989, vii]. For Williams, in the mid-20th century, they
                    were: culture, society, democracy, class, etc. For students of Golden Age Spain,
                    they tend to be moral and social terms inflected by the period’s dominant
                    philosophical concerns; for example, fuerza (1.
                        courage, 2. brute strength, 3.
                        the force of truth) and gentileza (1. cultivated manner and
                        appearance, 2. moral uprightness). The polysemy
                    of a word can be so extensive that it may include conflicting meanings as in
                        voluntad (1. the rational
                        will, part of the human soul, that seeks the moral good, 2. free choice, 3. uncontrolled sexual
                        desire).

                8
Undergirding William’s keyword study is a social semiotic theory of language,
                    which understands language as text delivered in a specific context of social
                    interaction and constructed from linguistic codes derived from the culture [Halliday and Hasan 1989]. From this theoretical perspective, the situational
                    context determines the text, and textual analysis should reflect a movement from
                    the outside inwards: “We have taken as our starting point the observation
                            that meanings are created by the social system and are exchanged by the
                            members in the form of text…. Persistence and change in the social
                            system are both reflected in text and brought about by means of text…
                            text as the semantic process of social dynamics”
                         [Halliday 1978, 141]. 

                9
Yuri Lotman, in his groundbreaking work on a semiotic theory of culture, finds
                    the language of literary texts to be the best vehicle for identifying specific
                    semiotic codes prevalent among different social groups in different historical
                    periods. “In the literary text there is an optimal correlation
                            whereby the conflicting structures are disposed not hierarchically but
                            dialogically on the same level. This is why a literary narrative is the
                            most flexible and effective modeling mechanism for describing extremely
                            complex structures and situations in their entirety”
                         [Lotman 1990, 163]. Cultural semiotics justifies the study of the literary canon as a rich
                    source of cultural memory, a portrait of the peculiar idiosyncrasy of an era,
                    and an open examination of social and racial taboos. In the case of Spanish
                    culture, reading Cervantes and his Golden Age contemporaries, bears this out:
                        “Los caracteres peculiares de
                            nuestro idioma no han tenido manifestación literaria más amplia, varia y
                            plena que en las obras cervantinas” (“The works of Cervantes exhibit the most
                            sweeping, most varied, and fullest representation of the unique
                            attributes of our language”) [Lapesa 1962, vii]. 

                10
GALGO, an online glossary of select keywords from
                    the Spanish Golden Age,[1]
                    seeks to instantiate language as social semiotic by linking the semantic
                    configurations of a literary text simultaneously to the cultural environment,
                    the linguistic system, and the social system [Halliday 1978, 142]. The computer is an ideal semiotic machine [Olsen 1993-1994, 313] to expose these overlapping layers of
                    meaning. Applying the conceptual design of M.A.K. Halliday’s social semiotic
                    model, GALGO’s interpretive apparatus provides the
                        field of discourse or context of situation for the
                    text in which a specific keyword appears. The field of
                        discourse presents clusters, word groupings of semiotic affinity that
                    describe the social action that is taking place in the text. GALGO also performs an interpretation of the tenor of discourse, highlighting sociological variables
                    connected to class status, gender role and racial category that refine a
                    keyword’s meaning from the perspective of interpersonal relationships. Finally,
                        GALGO adds commentary on
                    discursive structures, such as patterns of grammar, syntactic nuances, and
                    figurative language, that surround the keyword in the text.

                11
This method encourages students to unravel the cultural genealogy of pivotal
                    terms that “resist easy signification” and whose
                    lexical value(s) often differ from today’s. All keyword definitions undergo a
                    multilayered social semiotic analysis that can be compared and contrasted across
                    texts: “You’ve got to see the text as an actualized potential;
                            which means that you have got to study the potential…. We are interested
                            in what a particular writer has written comparatively against the
                            background of what he might have written, against the background of
                            other things he has written or that other people have written”
                         [Halliday 1978, 57–58]. In this way, GALGO guides learners to
                    pursue the deep connections that exist between language, literature, and
                    society.

            

            
                2. The Digital Tool: Navigating GALGO[2]

                12
GALGO’s strength resides in the synchronic
                    connectivity that the system facilitates when identifying the constellation of
                    meanings for any given keyword. From a technical perspective, the database
                    development has been a complex process, requiring multiple prototypes of the
                    glossary and many iterations of interface applications. The system must have the
                    ability to identify the absolute position of all uses of a keyword across
                    multiple texts and perform this task in an efficient way, so that large texts
                    can be managed and search times minimized for both users and system
                    administrators. GALGO is constructed in such a way
                    that users can not only access existing analysis within the database, but also
                    can assume, when instructed to do so, the role of the system administrator and
                    contribute their own annotations. 

                13
When a user logs on to read a particular literary work, the document is loaded
                    first into a browser frame. Once the work is loaded, it opens the user side
                    interface. The user interface is straightforward, so that one can quickly locate
                    specific keywords in the work, view definitions, and visualize the web of
                    semantic relationships that surround those keywords. A persistent navigation
                    system lists the keywords in the database to the far right of the literary work
                    and gives the multiple definitions for each word. There are hyperlinks to the
                        17th and 18th
                    century Spanish dictionaries from which the definitions are taken and GALGO’s English translations are derived.[3]
                    Figure 1 is a screenshot taken from GALGO that illustrates the multiple definitions for
                    the keyword honra, its conjugations, under
                        “Variations,” in the La Celestina and
                    links to all of the uses of honra. One can, at
                    any time, browse a work by keyword, clicking on a specific instance through
                        “Uses in this Work” and navigate to that textual location.

                
                    [image: ]

                Figure 1. 



                14
Users can opt to read the entire work linearly, viewing it as a single continuous
                    page. When they come to a highlighted keyword, they click on that word to see
                    the specific contextualized definition. That specific definition is given, along
                    with links to other places where that definition appears, both in the work being
                    read as well as in other works in the database. The purpose of the glossary is
                    not simply to trace the usage of a particular word but rather to trace the usage
                    of a particular definition of a particular word across many texts. Figure 2 and Figure 3
                    show screenshots of the same definition for honra in two different works, La
                        Celestina and El Abencerraje. Comparing
                    these distinct analyses of the definition, by exploring “Other Places this
                        Definition is Found,” serves to expand and clarify its meaning for the
                    reader.

                15

                    
                        [image: ]
                    Figure 2. 



                

                16

                    
                        [image: ]
                    Figure 3. 



                

                17
GALGO’s main feature is a powerful clustering
                    analysis tool that allows users to see how a particular definition of a keyword
                    is determined. A list of grouped terms given in the field of
                        discourse reveals the pertinent vocabulary to focus on in and around
                    the keyword. The analysis of the role relationships in a literary passage
                    appears as the tenor of discourse identifying social
                    discourse categories at play such as identity, class, ethnicity, or gender.
                    Finally, the commentary box links form with content,
                    deciphering the relevant rhetorical strategies. Figure
                        4, Figure 5 and Figure 6 offer views across different works that detail the
                    interwoven strands of meaning. 

                18

                    
                        [image: ]
                    Figure 4. 



                

                19

                    
                        [image: ]
                    Figure 5. 



                

                20

                    
                        [image: ]
                    Figure 6. 



                

                21
The process of data entry and keyword annotation has been successfully
                    streamlined for system administrators in this current version of GALGO. To create a new text, all the administrator
                    needs to do is fill out a simple web form, providing a title, specific metadata,
                    and uploading a TEI XML encoded text file. Once uploaded, the text document is
                    read into a buffer. The document is stored on the server in its unaltered state,
                    so it can be used later as an inviolable document of record. The search index
                    contains every keyword in the work and its absolute position in that work. Each
                    word also contains an absolute unique identifier, allowing the system to quickly
                    locate that word in every other work. 

                22
Administrators enter a keyword manually, and the application scans the document
                    to find and highlight every instance of the keyword and prepares a list of those
                    keywords in the database. When administrators click on an undefined usage,
                    either in the document, or in the word use list, an editing interface opens. In
                    this interface, a definition from a list of definitions already associated with
                    the keyword can be selected, or a new definition can be entered. Upon
                    submitting, the definition is associated with both the keyword itself and with
                    the particular usage selected. The clustering tool allows administrators to
                    annotate these definitions, explaining why certain word clusters are key to
                    understanding the text, referencing both field and tenor of discourse. A client
                    side selection tool permits the administrators to determine the boundaries of
                    the text by choosing neighboring terms to cluster with the keyword. These words,
                    their position in the text, and the keyword itself together make up the field of
                    discourse. 

                23
GALGO is comprised of a team of faculty and student
                    administrators who are building the database with research previously collected
                    in Spanish Golden Age literature seminars. Providence College students have
                    utilized the social semiotic methodology underlying GALGO for several years now with successful outcomes both in terms
                    of their growth as language majors and critical thinkers [Alonso García and Caplan 2014, 114–115]. Currently, the keyword analysis
                    completed in these classes is being input, and following that work, the system
                    will be expanded to include five additional literary works from the period and
                    five new keywords. The project has received public recognition from Providence
                    College, the digital humanities community, and the local Rhode Island
                    Spanish-speaking media.[4]

                24
Given that the sophisticated and powerful digital architecture behind GALGO can accommodate any set of works, whether in
                    another language or another discipline, we are in the process of seeking
                    feedback from a broader audience of colleagues and students. Focus groups will
                    be conducted to test the platform’s capabilities and discuss its applicability
                    beyond the field of Spanish literary studies. The nature of GALGO’s new analytical and visualization functions will be impacted
                    by the results of the focus group sessions. Future system development might
                    include advanced language manipulation and search functions. In particular, it
                    might include language specific stemming index algorithms that would make it
                    possible to match natural language terms and clusters across multiple works.
                    There could also be a quantitative facet to the cluster analysis that would
                    determine the keyword’s distributional profile[5] (DP) with
                    respect to underlying semantic relationships. GALGO’s interface could be enhanced to provide dynamic views that
                    reveal the distribution and intricacy of clustered lexical webs across any
                    corpus. 

            

            
                3. Multimodal Literacy: Blending Old Literature with New Media

                25
Students in the 21st century are equipped with a set
                    of literacy skills, honed through their extensive interactions on social media,
                    that enables them to communicate instantly with combinations of words, images,
                    and videos. The intertextuality of messages and unlimited data stream as well as
                    the participatory atmosphere of cyberspace have expanded the ways in which young
                    people amass knowledge, understand concepts, and interact in the world. In their
                    high school and college classes, the “Google Generation”,
                    inclined to interact with texts more freely, is reluctant to interpret meaning
                    solely in the context of a single mode and expects to generate its own questions
                    with respect to the subject matter [Calandra and Lee 2005]
                    [Giglio and Venecek 2009]. Arguably, faculty today have the responsibility to
                    meet students on their turf and honor their existing interests and expertise
                        [Jenkins and Kelley 2013] to better support them in their long term
                    intellectual pursuits [Bowen and Witthaus 2013]. 

                26
 An entirely new “textual landscape” has emerged as a
                    result of “on screen” communication environments [Carrington 2005]. Just as occurred with the introduction of
                    printing over five hundred years ago, information technology is spawning new
                    practices of creating, reading, and interpreting texts. Digitized documents
                    represent a vast expanse of varied data that can be instantaneously searched,
                    sorted, and categorized. The theory of multimodal literacy [Kress and van Leeuwen 2001]
                    [Kress 2003] posits that assimilating the semiotic resources of
                    written language, audiovisual images, and interactive elements on screen is a
                    distinct but not incompatible exercise from that of print-based reading and
                    writing. “Textuality as such survives the technological
                            revolution intact. Electronic technology does not replace the text but
                            actually extends and supplements certain features of textuality by
                            increasing our power to switch between texts of various kinds”
                         [Harpham 2005, 24]. The interactive modality offered by the electronic medium has led to a
                    form of reading coined “hyperreading,” computer-assisted human reading that
                    includes strategies such as skimming, hyperlinking, and scanning [Hayles 2010, 66]. Our digital tool, GALGO, is founded on hyperreading: “It enables a reader quickly to construct landscapes of
                            associated research fields and subfields; it shows ranges of
                            possibilities; it identifies texts and passages most relevant to a given
                            query; and it easily juxtaposes many different texts and
                            passages”
                         [Hayles 2010, 66].

                27
Nicholas Carr says this reliance on digital multimedia “disembodied” texts [Nicholas and Clark 2012, 97] is
                    altering the depth not only of our thoughts but also of our emotions. Certainly,
                    hyperreading has its fair share of detractors [Hayles 2010], and
                    Carr is the most cogent voice in arguing that it spawns shallow thinking [Carr 2010]. But, in other significant ways, textual fragmentation
                    captures what the study of language has always entailed: looking through
                    language to the reality that it represents and looking at the language that
                    represents it [Kramsch 2002]. By highlighting patterns,
                    parallelisms, and intertextual juxtapositions, hyperreading draws on visual
                    techniques used in viewing a painting [Kramsch 2002] and aligns
                    well with the rich tradition of annotation found in cultural artifacts of
                    earlier historical periods: “Before the mid 18th
                            century, many Western readers, if they read at all, sampled from a
                            variety of texts for which a linear reading would not be advisable:
                            periodicals, almanacs, collections, the Bible…”
                         [Jenkins and Kelley 2013, 2018]. 

                28
Multimodal learners employ hyperreading to navigate the Web according to their
                    own interests and intuitively perceive reading and writing as social, cultural,
                    and creative processes rather than simply as motor skills or linguistic acts
                        [Gee 2010]. O’Halloran and Lim define the “multimodal literate” person as one who is “sensitized to the meaning potential and choices
                            afforded in the production of the text, rendering an enhanced ability to
                            make deliberate and effective choices in the construction and
                            presentation of knowledge”
                         [O’Halloran and Lim 2011, 4]. Technology offers opportunities for discourse analysis that the “fixity of one graphic representation-the printed
                        page”[Jewitt 2005] cannot and frees the reader to
                    create multiple paths and relate with the text in a personally meaningful way. 

                29
We believe, then, that textual analysis in the digital era has the potential to
                    connect readers in more direct ways with primary sources from the distant past. “By ensuring that close reading interacts
                            synergistically with the kind of Web and hyperreading in which our young
                            people are increasingly immersed”
                         [Hayles 2010, 75], students of the humanities can surpass space and time boundaries and
                    effectively activate the “meaning-generating mechanism”
                         [Lotman 1990] of older canonical literature. “Text and readership seek mutual understanding. They
                                ‘adapt’ to each other. A text behaves like a
                            partner in dialogue: it re-orders itself (as far as its supply of
                            structural indeterminacy allows) in the image of the readership. And the
                            reader responds likewise, using his or her informational flexibility for
                            the restructuring which will draw him or her closer to the world of the
                            text”
                         [Lotman 1990, 80]. 

            

            
                Conclusion

                30
The vitality of literary classics depends on the ability and interest of each new
                    generation of readers to participate actively in a process of continuous
                    semantic (ex)change. In alignment with this
                    objective, GALGO prioritizes two
                    functions that other text analysis applications like Voyant [Sinclair 2016], NVivo software and Paper Machines do not: curation
                    and contextual meaning. GALGO allows a
                    professor to create a curated exhibit in order to help students see the ebb and
                    flow of particular words throughout a set of works. Voyant, for example, is good
                    at showing the usage cases of a particular word across a work, but there is no
                    way for a student, encountering a complex work for the first time, to make
                    semantic connections without help. Additionally, with GALGO, students can annotate a text themselves, and a professor can
                    review their work, creating opportunities for guided self-discovery and in-depth
                    conversation. These other tools do not afford this because they lack the
                    capacity to promote genuine collaboration on research.

                31
Finally, GALGO allows a student to look beyond the
                    word itself and trace contextual meaning, rather than just the word. A term is
                    always connected to several different possible definitions. These other tools
                    only show the uses of a particular word and do not help a student understand
                    that the same word can mean very different things depending on the fields and
                    tenors of discourse. It is unclear how useful it is just to see all the
                    instances of a given word, especially for students with limited knowledge of a
                    particular work, its period or even of the language in which it is written. By
                    showing the range of definitions for the keywords and allowing students to
                    browse by one or more definitions, GALGO exposes
                    how the meanings of the keywords both recur and vary across texts.

            

        
        
            

        
    

Notes
[1]  The first four works that have been input into the
                        database are: El Abencerraje. La historia de
                            Abindarraez y la hermosa Jarifa, La
                            Celestina, El Lazarillo de Tormes y de
                            sus fortunas y adversidades, and La
                            Numancia. The first five keywords are: esfuerzo, fuerza, gentileza, honra, and voluntad.
[2] 
                        GALGO is under construction and can be accessed
                        at http://glossary.mervideo.us/
[3]  The
                            Tesoro de la lengua castellana o española
                            (Treasure of the Castilian or Spanish
                            Language) by Sebastián de Covarrubias, published in 1611, can be
                        found at http://fondosdigitales.us.es/fondos/libros/765/16/tesoro-de-la-lengua-castellana-o-espanola/,
                        and the three-volume 18th-century Diccionario de autoridades (Dictionary of the Royal Spanish Academy) is located at http://web.frl.es/DA.html. 
[4]  Listen to the most recent interview with the
                        authors and a student researcher on Rhode Island Latino Public Radio: http://lprnoticias.com/2016/05/13/podcats-galgo-providence-college-entrevista-con-el-dr-pablo-rodriguez/.
[5]  According to the
                        Distributional Hypothesis, the distributional profile (DP) of a word is
                        determined by the strength of association of the word with co-occurring
                        words in the text [[Rubenstein and Goodenough 1965]; [Schütze 1992]; [Pantel 2005]] 

Works Cited
Alonso García and Caplan 2014 Alonso García, N.
                    and Caplan, A. “Reading the World’s Classics Critically: A
                        Keyword-Based Approach to Literary Analysis in Foreign Language
                        Studies.”
                    Critical Inquiry in Language Studies, 11.2 (2014):
                    100-120.
Bowen 2012 Bowen, J.A. Teaching Naked: How Moving Technology Out of Your College Classroom Will
                        Improve Student Learning. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco (2012).
Bowen and Witthaus 2013 Bowen, T. and Witthaus, C.
                        Multimodal Literacies and Emerging Genres.
                    University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh (2013). 
Brier 2012 Brier, S. “Where’s
                        the Pedagogy? The Role of Teaching and Learning in the Digital
                        Humanities.” In M.K. Gold (ed), Debates in the
                        Digital Humanities (2012) http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/8.
Calandra and Lee 2005 Calandra, B. and Lee, J.K.
                        “The digital history and pedagogy project: Creating an
                        interpretative/pedagogical historical website.”
                    The Internet and Higher Education, 8.4, (2005):
                    323-333.
Carr 2010 Carr, N. The
                        Shallows: What the Internet is Doing to Our Brains. W.W. Norton
                    & Co., New York (2010).
Carrington 2005 Carrington, V. “New textual landscapes, information and early
                        literacy.” In J. Marsh (ed), Popular Culture,
                        New Media and Digital Literacy in Early Childhood. Routledge, New
                    York (2005): 13-27.
Clement 2013 Clement, T. “Text Analysis, Data Mining, and Visualizations in Literary
                        Scholarship.”
                    Literary Studies in the Digital Age: An Evolving
                        Anthology. MLA Commons (2013). https://dlsanthology.commons.mla.org/text-analysis-data-mining-and-visualizations-in-literary-scholarship
                
Crane 2004 Crane, G. “Classics
                        and the Computer: An End of the History.” In S. Schreibman, R.
                    Siemens, & J. Unsworth (eds), A Companion to Digital
                        Humanities. Blackwell, Oxford (2004): 46-55.
Drucker 2012 Drucker, J. “Humanistic Theory and Digital Scholarship.” In M.K. Gold (ed),
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities (2012). http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/34
Fernández Gómez 1962 Fernández Gómez, C.
                        Vocabulario de Cervantes. Prólogo de Rafael
                    Lapesa. Real Academia Española, Madrid (1962).
Fyfe 2011 Fyfe, P. “How to Not
                        Read a Victorian Novel.”
                    Journal of Victorian Culture, 16.1 (2011):
                    84-88.
Gee 2010 Gee, J.P. “A Situated
                        Social-Cultural Approach to Literacy and Technology.” In E.A. Baker
                    (ed), The New Literacies. Multiple Perspectives on Research
                        and Practice. The Guilford Press, New York (2010): 165-193.
Giglio and Venecek 2009 [Giglio and Venecek 2009]
                    Giglio, K. and Venecek, J. “The Radical Historicity of
                        Everything: Exploring Shakespearean Identity with Web 2.0.”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly, 3.3 (2009). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/3/000063/000063.html
Halliday 1978 Halliday, M.A.K. Language as Social Semiotic. The Social Interpretation of
                        Language and Meaning. University Park Press, Baltimore
                    (1978).
Halliday and Hasan 1989 Halliday, M.A.K. and
                    Hasan, R. Language, Context, and Text: Aspects of Language
                        in a Social-Semiotic Perspective. Oxford University Press, Oxford
                    (1989).
Halliday and Matthiessen 2004 Halliday, M. and
                    Matthiessen, C. An Introduction to Functional
                        Grammar. Routledge, London (2004) 3rd
                    ed.
Harpham 2005 Harpham, G. G. “Beneath and Beyond the ‘Crisis in the
                        Humanities’.”
                    New Literary History, 36.1 (2005): 21-36.
Hart et al. 2005 Hart, R., Jarvis, S., Jennings, W.
                    and Smith-Howell, D. Political Keywords: Using Language
                        that Uses Us. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2005). 
Hayles 2010 Hayles, K. N. “How
                        We Read: Close, Hyper, Machine.”
                    ADE Bulletin, 150 (2010): 62-79. http://nkhayles.com/how_we_read.html
Inman Berens 2014 Inman Berens, K. “Interface.”
                    Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities. Concepts, Models, and
                        Experiments. MLA Commons (2014). https://digitalpedagogy.commons.mla.org/keywords/interface/
Jenkins and Kelley 2013 Jenkins, H. and Kelley,
                    W., (eds) Reading in a Participatory Culture: Remixing
                        Moby-Dick in the English Classroom. Teachers College Press, New York
                    (2013).
Jewitt 2005 Jewitt, C. “Multimodality, ‘Reading’, and ‘Writing’ for the 21st Century.”
                    Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of
                        Education, 26.3 (2005): 315-331.
Jewitt and Kress 2003 Jewitt, C., and Kress, G.
                        (eds) Multimodal Literacy. Peter Lang, New York
                    (2003).
Kramsch 2002 Kramsch, C. “Language and Culture: A Social Semiotic Perspective.”
                    ADFL Bulletin, 33.2 (2002): 8-15.
Kress 2003 Kress, G. Literacy
                        in the New Media Age. Routledge, London & New York
                    (2003).
Kress 2010 Kress, G. Multimodality: A Social Semiotic Approach to Contemporary
                        Communication. Routledge, London & New York (2010).
Kress and van Leeuwen 2001 Kress, G. and van
                    Leeuwen. T. Multimodal Discourse: The Modes and Media of
                        Contemporary Communication. Arnold, London (2001).
Lambert 2002 Lambert, J. Digital Storytelling: Capturing Lives, Creating Community. Digital
                    Diner Press, Berkeley (2002).
Lapesa 1962 Lapesa, R. “Prólogo”. In Fernández Gómez, C. Vocabulario de
                        Cervantes. Real Academia Española, Madrid (1962).
Liu 2012 Liu, A. “The State of
                        the Digital Humanities: A Report and a Critique.”
                    Arts and Humanities in Higher Education, 11.1-2
                    (2012): 8-41.
Lotman 1990 Lotman, Y. M. Universe of the Mind. A Semiotic Theory of Culture. I.B. Taurus
                    & Co., London, England (1990).
Marsh 2005 Marsh, J. (ed) Popular Culture, New Media and Digital Literacy in Early Childhood.
                    Routledge, New York (2005).
Moretti 2013 Moretti, F. Distant Reading. Verso Press, London, England (2013).
Nicholas and Clark 2012 Nicholas, D. and Clark,
                    D. “‘Reading’ in the Digital Environment.”
                    Learned Publishing, 25.2 (2012): 93-98. 
Nilsson 2010 Nilsson, M. “Developing voice in digital storytelling through creativity, narrative and
                        multimodality.”
                    International Journal of Media, Technology and Lifelong
                        Learning, 6.2 (2010): 148-160.
Olsen 1993-1994 Olsen, M. “Signs, Symbols and Discourses: A New Direction for Computer-Aided
                        Literature Studies.”
                    Computers and the Humanities, 27. 5-6 (1993-1994):
                    309-314.
O’Halloran and Lim 2011 O’Halloran, K. L. and
                    Lim, F. V. “Dimensioner af multimodal literacy. Viden om
                        Læsning.” 10, (2011) 14-21.
Pantel 2005 Pantel, P. “Inducing ontological co-occurrence vectors.” In Proceedings of the 43rd Conference of the Association for Computational
                        Linguistics, ACL’05, (2005) 125–132.
Ramsey 2003 Ramsey, S. “Toward
                        an Algorithmic Criticism.”
                    Literary and Linguistic Computing, 18.2 (2003):
                    167-74.
Ramsey and Rockwell 2012 Ramsey, S. and Rockwell,
                    G. “Developing Things: Notes Toward an Epistemology of
                        Building in the Digital Humanities.” In M.K. Gold (ed), Debates in the Digital Humanities (2012). http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/11
Rubenstein and Goodenough 1965 Rubenstein, H.
                    and Goodenough, J. “Contextual correlates of
                        synonymy.”
                    Communications of the ACM, 8.10, (1965):
                    627–633.
Saif and Graeme 2006 Saif M. and Graeme, H. “Measuring Semantic Distance Using Distributional
                        Profiles of Concepts.”
                    Computional Linguistics, 1,1, (2006): 1-34.
Schreibman and Hanlon 2010 Schreibman, S. and
                    Hanlon, A. M. “Determining Value for Digital Humanities
                        Tools: Report on a Survey of Tool Developers.” Digital Humanities
                    Quarterly, 4.2 (2010). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/4/2/000083/000083.html
Schütze 1992 Schütze, H. “Dimensions of meaning.” In Proceedings of the
                        1992 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing, Supercomputing’92 ,
                    (1992): 787– 796. 
Sinclair 2003 Sinclair, S. “Computer-Assisted Reading: Reconceiving Text Analysis.”
                    Literary and Linguistic Computing, 18.2 (2003):
                    175-184.
Sinclair 2016 Sinclair, S. and Rockwell, G.
                        Hermeneutica Computer-Assisted Interpretation in the
                        Humanities. MIT Press, Cambridge (2016). 
Walsh 2009 Walsh, M. “Pedagogic
                        Potentials of Multimodal Literacy.” In Tan Wee Hin, L., and
                    Subramanian, R. (eds.), Handbook of Research on New Media
                        Literacy at the K~12 Level: Issues and Challenges I and II. IGI
                    Global, U.S. (2009): 32-47.
Walsh 2010 Walsh, M. “Multimodal literacy: What does it mean for classroom practice?”
                    Australian Journal of Language and
                    Literacy, 33.3 (2010): 211-239.
Williams 1983 Williams, R. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society. Oxford University
                    Press, New York, NY (1983) 2nd ed.

2017 11.3
             | 
            XML
            | 
            Print Article


Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

 
            URL: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000323/000323.html
Last updated:
            
 Comments: dhqinfo@digitalhumanities.org
 Published by:
            The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
Affiliated with: Literary and Linguistic Computing
 Copyright 2005 - 
[image: Creative Commons License]
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
        


