[image: DHQ Logo]
[image: Digital Humanities Quarterly Logo]

homesubmissionsabout dhqdhq peoplecontact
 




Current Issue
	2017: 11.3

Preview Issue
	2017: 11.4

Previous Issues
	2017: 11.2
	2017: 11.1
	2016: 10.4
	2016: 10.3
	2016: 10.2
	2016: 10.1
	2015: 9.4
	2015: 9.3
	2015: 9.2
	2015: 9.1
	2014: 8.4
	2014: 8.3
	2014: 8.2
	2014: 8.1
	2013: 7.3
	2013: 7.2
	2013: 7.1
	2012: 6.3
	2012: 6.2
	2012: 6.1
	2011: 5.3
	2011: 5.2
	2011: 5.1
	2010: 4.2
	2010: 4.1
	2009: 3.4
	2009: 3.3
	2009: 3.2
	2009: 3.1
	2008: 2.1
	2007: 1.2
	2007: 1.1

Indexes
	 Title
	 Author


[image: sidenavbarimg]ISSN 1938-4122

Announcements
	Call for Reviewers
	Call for Submissions


[image: button1-addthis.gif]

DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly
2017
Volume 11 Number 3
2017 11.3
                     | 
                    XML

| 
		   Discuss
			(
				Comments
			)
                



    
        
            
                
                From Disclaimer to Critique: Race and the Digital Image
                    Archivist

                Kate Holterhoff <kate_dot_holterhoff_at_gmail_dot_com>, Georgia Institute of Technology

            
            

            
        
        
        
        
     


    
        
            Abstract

                
                While the massive and difficult task of finding, documenting, and centralizing
                    collections is certainly of great concern to image archivists, and has been the
                    motivating factor for beginning numerous digital humanities projects, strategies
                    and best practices for archiving challenging or offensive visual objects (images
                    that are non-canonical, violent, and ambiguous) remains under-theorized. Using
                    the Pitt Rivers Museum, the Jim Crow Museum of Racist Memorabilia, Harpweek, the Center for Holocaust and Genocide
                    Studies, and Visual Haggard: The Illustration
                        Archive as case studies, I address the question of how digital image
                    archivists ought to approach the task of curating objects with the potential to
                    cause trauma. I bring together several critical strands–most importantly visual
                    culture, race theory, and archival science–to question how the structure of a
                    digital archive database might best achieve the goals of educating the public,
                    supporting social justice, and enabling the researches of humanities
                    scholars.

            

            
        
        
            1
What is the duty of a digital image archivist to her objects, community, and the
                historical record? As digitization increasingly mediates the stories we tell
                ourselves about the past, humanists must reevaluate this constellation of concerns.
                Visual objects housed in archives, libraries, and museums and previously accessible
                to only a select few are now digitally available through image scans, video essays,
                and 3D virtual tours, to name just a few formats. While the massive and difficult
                task of finding, documenting, and centralizing collections is certainly of great
                concern to image archivists, and has been the motivating factor for beginning
                numerous digital humanities projects, strategies and best practices for archiving
                challenging or offensive visual objects (images that are non-canonical, violent, and
                ambiguous) remain under-theorized. Using as case studies the Pitt Rivers Museum, the
                Jim Crow Museum of Racist Memorabilia, Harpweek, the
                Center for Holocaust and Genocide Studies, and an archive that I direct and edit
                titled Visual Haggard, I address the question of how
                digital image archivists ought to approach the task of curating objects with the
                potential to cause trauma. I bring together several critical strands–most
                importantly visual culture, race theory, and archival science–to question how the
                structure of a digital archive database might best achieve the goals of educating
                the public, supporting social justice, and enabling the researches of humanities
                scholars. Inspired by the museums of conscience idea [D&D Resources], which argues that museums offer a space for
                education and justice, I contend that improving database search functionality
                through heavy editing–metadata that is voluminous, polyvocal, and critical–is at
                present the best means for facilitating digital image archives to contribute to this
                increasingly significant socio-political project.

            2
Prominent digital humanists like Lev Manovich have long argued that objects remain
                effectively invisible without adequate database search functionality [Manovich 2002], and nowhere is this so evident as in the case of
                images. Michael Whitelaw claims that in order to interrogate the 7,000 images
                archived by the Manly Public Library in Sydney, Australia, scholars require more
                    “generous interfaces” that permit browsing [Whitelaw 2015, P20–24]. Allan Sekula troubles the illusion of
                truthfulness fostered by the paradigm of photographic archives, which he argues “by their very structure maintain a hidden connection
                        between knowledge and power”
                     [Sekula 2010, 442]. Searchability is essential to all web applications that provide an interface
                to databases of predominantly visual archival material (Rossetti Archive, Visual Haggard, William Blake Archive), but the
                question of what types of searching these interfaces should stimulate remains
                unresolved. Online databases typically contain the resources, metadata, and
                references to all media for a hypertext website. It is the role of the database to
                structure data, but with current technology it cannot imbue that data with meaning.
                In Manovich’s words: “As a cultural form, database represents the world as a list
                        of items, and it refuses to order this list”
                     [Manovich 2007, 44]. In the case of images, problems regarding descriptive and searchable
                metadata tags become particularly important, as these must be individually
                identified, articulated, and encoded by archivists. While this task is often
                restricted to the straightforward identification of artist, medium, dimensions,
                provenance, and subject matter, a more detailed metadata description might also
                include interpretive information about style, referents, content, and art movements.
                Of course, even experts contest how to interpret these latter features, which makes
                historical images of violence and hate notoriously challenging to not only digitize
                and preserve, but also categorize. Image metadata, which must always be in some
                degree subjective and interpretative, has become a logical site for inserting
                analysis and critique.

            3
As art historian James Elkins notes, “pictures are… stubbornly illegible, weirdly silent,
                            ‘meaningless’ artifacts where all our best attempts
                        at understanding fall apart”
                     [Elkins 1998, xxi]. Digital image archivists must create narratives and keywords to guide
                visitors into and around the database, essentially bestowing voice and meaning onto
                objects that are otherwise mute. For this reason the searchability of digital
                archives devoted to images is almost entirely dependent on human invention. It is no
                great wonder that editor for the Blake Archive Morris
                Eaves laments that the “day-to-day editorial reality on the picture front remains
                        rocky and polluted”
                     [Eaves 2009, P2], while digital rhetoric scholars Douglas Eyman and Cheryl Ball have
                complained about the absence of a “coherent body of scholarship that offers a sustained
                        analysis of scholarly multimedia and its growing impact on digital
                        scholarship in the humanities”
                     [Eyman and Ball 2015, 66]. [1] I will respond to this difficulty
                by considering what problems arise for the digital archivist tasked with composing
                descriptive metadata for offensive images. My study examines variously sized museums
                and archives that provide online access to images because all institutions deal
                closely with digitized images of historical objects, and therefore grapple with
                overlapping concerns. In fact, every digital archive is visual because archives must
                include scans and photographs of primary documents and objects in addition to
                transcriptions and descriptions [Shillingsburg 2014, 160].
                However, I focus my project on graphic pictures, and not scanned images of written
                texts, in order to better assess not only how much formal information the archivist
                should provide about the object, but specifically how the archivist should approach
                ethically abhorrent visual content. 

            4
Theorizing potentially traumatic texts, objects, and images is important to the
                digital archive’s continued evolution. As suggested by recent discussions about the
                role of feminism for archives by Tarez Samra Graban and Jacqueline Wernimont [Graban 2013, 171–93]
                [Wernimont 2013, P1–23], as well as Kimberly Christen’s
                development of the Mukurtu content management system, or digital “safe
                    keeping place,” which emerged in response to the unique needs of
                tribal archives, libraries, and museums (TALMs), the stakes of thinking through best
                practices for ally archivism is a timely and necessary project. Allies must
                recognize the cause of justice as a process rather than an endpoint, and must
                actively seek out the marginalized voices they purpose to represent. In the West,
                and especially the United States, few issues have been as polemic as the discourse
                surrounding social justice. My essay both responds to this expedience, and comes out
                of recent calls to make the humanities, and especially the digital humanities, more
                accountable. Consider Jessica Marie Johnson’s statement in an interview with the
                    Los Angeles Review of Books: I think there are questions that the humanities has struggled
                        with and for me those questions relate to issues of accountability: Are we
                        accountable to students? Are we accountable to the communities our
                        universities are in? Are we accountable to all of our students? Are we
                        accountable to transgender students who want to use different bathrooms? On
                        the surface those seem like things that are aside from humanities work and
                        scholarship. But I think that what the humanities is grappling with is how
                        to be relevant to a changing demographic and changing communities, both at
                        the university level and within the communities in which universities are
                        situated. [Johnson 2016]

The important and complex
                question of accountability in the humanities is one with which researchers and
                educators alike must grapple, but it is particularly significant for creators and
                maintainers of public facing online archives. 

            5
This article assesses some examples of digital image archives to consider what a
                socially responsible archival practice might look like. I argue that a more
                inclusive, flexible, and plural means of archive metadata construction can be
                preferable for cataloging traumatic materials than holding too rigidly or singularly
                to top-down, institutionally developed nomenclature precedents, database structures,
                and labeling standards (e.g. the Library of Congress subject headings,
                the Visual Resources Association, and the J. Paul Getty Trust’s Categories for the
                Description of Works of Art). I will suggest that rich or heavy editing offers ally
                archivists the best means for promoting accountability because it permits a greater
                number of voices to be heard than that which is afforded by more conventional
                labeling and keyword attribution techniques. Several digital archivists have already
                called for this expansive type of metadata creation. When “Mukurtu researchers
                    found that traditional library catalogs often lacked essential details beyond a
                    short quote or internal tracking number, providing little information to
                    users” they pushed back against these incomplete and unrepresentative “Westernized standards of content management”
                     [IMLS 2015, P4]. Thanks to its collaborative and inclusive development process, Mukurtu now
                permits “users to implement their own cultural practices for sharing
                        materials, and to richly narrate those materials”
                     [IMLS 2015, P4]. Similarly, Amanda Gailey, co-editor of the unpublished Race and Children’s Literature of the Gilded Age project, which is
                intended to “allow researchers to examine how this body of literature
                        and illustrations helped construct notions of race and childhood during a
                        pivotal period in U.S. history”
                     [WUSTL 2017], has been a vocal proponent of “heavy editing” to make
                this digital archive’s metadata useful for students and researchers alike [Gailey 2011, 125]. I extend these existing calls for
                    “richly narrate[d]” and “heavy” editing to
                all image archives containing objects that might cause distress because this
                strategy provides the best means for holding digital projects accountable to the
                groups and individuals they continue to traumatize. By including a plurality of
                voices within a database’s metadata, archives may become more diverse, critical, and
                inclusive.

            
                The Museum Database

                6
When museums and archives moved online their roles shifted, and nowhere is this
                    so apparent as with visual objects. Thanks to the tremendous efforts of digital
                    archivists, primary texts–written, aural, and visual–are no longer cordoned off
                    behind marble walls that admit only willing patrons. Once made available online
                    and in open access form, encoded tags, keywords, and annotations exist as part
                    of the entire Internet, and not merely within the context of one single
                    database. Typing a database’s metadata keywords or phrases into a search engine
                    like Google draws-in individuals previously unaware of an archive and its
                    subject matter. Search engine results create continuity between various
                    websites; they are dependent on algorithms, and for that reason the most useful
                    and discoverable metadata must be that which most fully accords with the logic
                    of the search engine. Yet facilitating discovery poses numerous challenges.
                    While the judicious implementation of tags is necessary to the work of the
                    digital archivist, achieving a complete, universal, or unbiased set of metadata
                    tags is obviously impossible. No object can ever be completely searchable.
                    Relatedly, some searches return false connections (through synonyms or trending
                    searches). However, using descriptive metadata that serves the same purpose as
                    annotations might illuminate basic content such as the intent of the original
                    creator and information about the reading experience of historical audiences.
                    Annotations should anticipate the likely needs of scholarly and lay readers
                    while forecasting the possible interests of audiences in the future. Today it is
                    rare for object tags to achieve even a portion of these worthwhile qualities,
                    and possibly for good reason.

                7
Descriptive metadata makes primary materials available immediately, unexpectedly,
                    and intimately. This accessibility affects more than just scholars. Discovering
                    historical documents and artifacts can lead to creative interpretations and
                    remixes in popular culture. In fact, cyberpunk novelist William Gibson states: “Our culture no longer bothers to use words like
                                appropriation or borrowing… The record,
                            not the remix, is the anomaly today. The remix is the very nature of the
                            digital”
                         [Gibson 2005, P10].[2] Placing digitized
                    archival materials online expands and re-contextualizes their significance, and
                    visual texts are particularly liable to remixing. Consider the Internet meme
                    created using the 1793 self-portrait of French painter Joseph Ducreaux (Portrait de l'artiste sous les traits
                            d'un moqueur, Louvre Museum). These witty,
                    entertaining, and topical remixed memes represent the best of online culture.
                    Joseph Ducreaux’s impish expression and pointing fingers have inspired meme
                    creators to make comics combining contemporary sentiments with archaic phrasing.
                    One anonymous author, for example, attached the phrase “Gentlemen, I inquire
                        who hath released the hounds?,” which a little thinking reveals to be an
                    overwrought parody of the Baha Men song “Who Let the Dogs
                        Out?” (2000). More and more educators hold up the meme form, and this
                    subset specifically, as exemplary for expanding vocabulary, encouraging critical
                    thinking, and introducing the public to art history. Unfortunately, facilitating
                    access to primary materials also has the potential to perpetuate, and even
                    proliferate, stereotypes about historically oppressed groups. As the numerous
                    Black Sambo caricatures of Barack Obama available online suggests, racist
                    primary materials also have the ability to resurface as inspiration for
                    contemporary hate speech. Access to historical images is a reality, and in many
                    respects a positive one, but how these texts are discovered and contextualized
                    by way of metadata tags and database structure remains unsettled.

                8
The object collection database for the Pitt Rivers Museum, an institution housing
                    over half a million anthropological and ethnological artifacts, provides a
                    useful example of metadata’s role in archival practice. In addition to more
                    concrete information about each artifact’s dimensions and material, this archive
                    sorts entries using Keywords (amulet, hook, quiver) and Classifications
                    (agriculture, clothing, writing). Generally absent though is interpretative
                    information such as, say, an amulet’s possible significance or the likely
                    ceremonial function of a piece of clothing. This is no great surprise
                    considering that, as Jeremy Coote, a curator and joint head of collections at
                    the Pitt Rivers Museum explains, “the databases were initially constructed for internal
                            use. It was then decided to make them available online for the benefit
                            of researchers and the wider public”
                         [Coote 2016]. The repercussions of openly releasing museum records online are
                    numerous. Scholars may now conduct research in the Pitt Rivers Museum object
                    collections virtually at anytime and from any place in the world. While access
                    democratizes the collection, it has also divorced these artifacts from
                    curatorial supervision. Experts may not require guidance by way of heavy
                    editorializing to glean needed information from the archive, but the absence of
                    historical and cultural context may be disadvantageous to non-academics tasked
                    with interpreting these objects from metadata created to assist scholars. The
                    Pitt Rivers Museum object collections interface provides the public with access
                    to identifiers like the accession number, geographical region, cultural group,
                    and field collector, but without interpretive and contextual information it
                    remains most appropriate for academics, archivists, and anthropologists.
                    Although the site offers curated blog posts and education guides, a lack of
                    editorial commentary within the structure of the database itself can make
                    visiting the Pitt Rivers object collections database rather disconcerting for
                    non-specialists, and possibly traumatic to visitors encountering its offensive
                    content. 

                9
What interests me about the Pitt Rivers Museum’s digital archive is its
                    historicity. This database highlights the museum’s role as not only an active
                    and growing anthropological collection, but also an institution bounded by
                    nineteenth-century traditions and ideological assumptions. More so than other
                    institutions, the Pitt Rivers Museum contains, and was in previous decades
                    responsible for generating, ideologically contentious and sometimes hateful
                    content. For this reason, the collection provides access to not only images and
                    metadata pertaining to the artifacts of ancient and diverse peoples, but also
                    letters, manuscripts, and photographs documenting the work of Pitt Rivers and
                    his colleagues in the field. In order to ensure that users are made aware of the
                    status of these records the database includes the statement: “It is important to see how objects were perceived in
                            the past, therefore we preserve all the information ever recorded. Some
                            of the historic wording may now appear outdated and even
                            offensive”
                         [Pitt Rivers Museum 2015]. Curators at Pitt Rivers consider this statement to be so important that
                    the popup windows accompanying every object in the database paraphrase this last
                    sentence. Mr. Coote explains the necessity of repeating this disclaimer for
                    ensuring “that such an explanation was present on any single
                            record, which might of course be printed out”
                         [Coote 2016]. Both historical integrity and transparency about the information’s
                    status is laudable but limited. Disclaimers resemble trigger warnings because
                    they notify visitors of offensive content. Yet disclaimers also serve to
                    disassociate the mission and ideology of an institution from the content it
                    hosts and disseminates. In fact, the Pitt Rivers Museum implicitly supports the
                    notion that publishing information differs from upholding it. While I have no
                    interest in tackling the philosophical and ethical question of whether some
                    documents ought to be made public ever, an issue about which Wikileaks continues
                    to grapple [Zifcak 2012], the disclaimer paradigm is passive and
                    typically neglects the opportunity to engage with visitors, scaffold user
                    experience, and critique the past.

                10
I pause to consider a particularly upsetting example taken from the Pitt Rivers
                    Museum manuscript collection, albeit a transcription rather than an image, and
                    then consider opportunities to critique this traumatic content. This archive
                    records several sexist, racist, and xenophobic letters written by Patrick
                    Michael Byrne (1856-1932) to Anglo-Australian anthropologist Baldwin Spencer
                    (1860-1929) on the topics of science and the “Native
                        Question.” Although Byrne was the officer-in-charge for the
                    Overland Telegraph Line, and not a scientist, he took a keen interest in
                    evolutionary biology and ethnography [Mulvaney 2000, 12]. In
                    a letter dated 24 May 1895, Byrne mocks Alexander Thomas Magarey (1849-1906) and
                    Thomas Worsnop (1821-1898), members of the Royal Geographical Society of
                    Australasia, for what he interprets as their sympathy towards the religion and
                    art of native Australians. Byrne dismisses the notion that these aboriginals
                    have a true spiritual life, joking that a religion as profitable as Theosophy
                    might be invented with the assistance of an aboriginal
                        “conjuror,” because “if a third rate female trickster can deceive an
                            Australian Judge, one should be able to educate a nigger to gull the
                            ordinary Public in a very short space of time”
                         [Byrne 1895]. Encountering and contextualizing attitudes like those articulated by
                    Byrne and his contemporaries is an unfortunate reality for historians. In past
                    decades, feminists, race theorists, postcolonial critics, cultural studies
                    scholars, and historians of science have all worked to mediate these threads of
                    nineteenth-century bigotry, but I wonder about the consequences of making
                    Byrne’s words publicly available on the Internet. Is it the responsibility of
                    digital archivists to curate and annotate the hateful objects they release into
                    the online public sphere, or should these statements be made outside of the
                    archive in peer-reviewed journals, edited collections, or academic blogs? 

                11
Few would argue that Byrne’s letter should be censored or removed entirely,
                    myself included, but scholars must think carefully about the context,
                    accessibility, and descriptive tags that accompany hateful digitized artifacts.
                    Instead of remaining silenced in a box stored physically on site, objects in
                    digital archives have the potential to speak again through the public’s
                    often-unpredictable keyword searches. All voices and ideas rendered searchable
                    online are immortal. Like zombies, search engines ensure that proper keyword
                    entry revives all lexical metadata. But what information might accompany, if not
                    every, at least all problematic texts? Perhaps portions of archives containing
                    obviously offensive content might incorporate specific editorial statements
                    rather than general disclaimers (although it is worth noting that the manuscript
                    collections portion of the Pitt Rivers Museum’s website that contains Byrne’s
                    letters does not include the statement about “outdated” and
                        “offensive” content that accompanies the object
                    collections database). The Pitt Rivers Museum’s treatment of its collections
                    suggests that, in a sense, digitizing hate-promoting primary documents revives
                    these voices, so, in the case of Byrne, archivists might consider including
                    links to an explanation of the historical relationship between bigotry and the
                    discipline of anthropology, the British Empire, Social Darwinism, and/or Spencer
                    and Byrne’s biographies. Archivists might also direct readers to something
                    written by the community of Australian peoples Byrne disparages. Finally,
                    metadata labeling this material as “racist” might be included
                    as a TEI tag so that researchers looking to study this type of material can more
                    easily discover and offer scholarly critique of Byrne’s letter. In short, rather
                    than a static digital record of hate and prejudice, however historically
                    accurate, the Pitt Rivers archivists might use Spencer’s words as an opportunity
                    to talk back to the past. 

                12
I admit the grounds of my discussion about the Pitt Rivers Museum’s digital
                    archive are slippery. In the first place, ideas equally if not more offensive to
                    those expressed in Byrne’s letter can be found in the books digitized and made
                    searchable through optical character recognition (OCR) rendering in digital
                    libraries including Project Gutenberg, Google
                    Books, HathiTrust, and Internet Archive. Second, it takes an enormous amount of time and
                    funding to add annotations to a museum or archive’s vast collections–resources
                    that might be better spent on preservation and maintenance initiatives. To the
                    first concern I counter that annotation and curation should be what sets digital
                    archives and museums apart from digital libraries. In the second, it seems to me
                    that because financial barriers vary on a case-to-case basis, institutions might
                    prioritize curation for cases of extreme or obviously hateful content. 

            

            
                The Digital Archive as Critique

                13
Henry Louis Gates Jr., editor of Harvard University’s Image
                        of the Black in Western Art Archive and a self-described collector
                    of what he terms “racist memorabilia,” suggests that there
                    are compelling reasons for exhibiting racist artifacts, with “the most important function of displaying and
                            collecting this stuff [being] a didactic one: critique”
                         [Gates 2013, P5]. In Gates’s words, “we need to study these images in order to deflect the
                            harm that they continue to inflict upon African Americans, at the
                            deepest levels of the American unconscious”
                         [Gates 2013, P20]. Because racism persists in contemporary culture, material artifacts of
                    this hate must be preserved, displayed, and studied. But what does it mean to
                    use visual artifacts as a means of critique in digital archives? In this section
                    I survey examples of online collections devoted to racist American artifacts, as
                    well as strategies for their inclusion in hypertext formats.

                14
The Jim Crow Museum of Racist Memorabilia at Ferris State University has a
                    similar mission to that expressed by Gates of using, “objects of intolerance to teach tolerance and promote
                            social justice”
                         [Pilgrim 2016]. Highlighting racist American ephemera promotes change by underscoring
                    the trauma these images continue to cause. The legacy of racism in the United
                    States is far from resolved, so it remains necessary for humanists to highlight
                    past inequalities in order to promote social justice in the present. Because
                    this museum’s mission includes advocating “the scholarly examination of
                        historical and contemporary expressions of racism,” founder and curator
                    David Pilgrim has made context and curatorship an extremely important component
                    of this institution [Pilgrim 2016]. It is for this reason that,
                    unlike many other museums, explanatory statements and labels are lengthy and
                    plentiful. The visibility of offensive images must not be suppressed or
                    forgotten, but it should not exist without curation. Images of hate speak too
                    loudly and powerfully to go unmediated by scholars and activists.

                15
Contrasting with the Pitt Rivers Museum’s large database of minimally tagged
                    objects, the website for the much smaller (9,000 objects) Jim Crow Museum
                    accompanies its “objects and collections related to racial segregation,
                        anti-black caricatures, civil rights, and African American achievement”
                    with heavy annotations through informational videos, essays, and lesson plans
                        [Pilgrim 2016]. In fact, online there is no database record.
                    Instead, Pilgrim embeds a sampling of objects within categorical hypertext
                    essays focused on caricature types: Brute, Picaninny, Tom, Nigger, Saphire,
                    Jezebel, Mammy, Coon, the Tragic Mulatto, Golliwog and Nat. To view images of
                    these caricatures visitors must first access an essay contextualizing and
                    historicizing the stereotype. The Mammy essay, for example, includes five images
                    of individual objects, unaccompanied by title or creation date in addition to a
                    sixth panoramic photograph of the physical display case devoted to this
                    caricature type. There is also a link to a slideshow showcasing 75 Mammy
                    stereotype images. Instead of including objects in a labeled and sorted
                    database, the website contextualizes a sampling of artifacts in a way that
                    explains their social, political, and historical significance. 

                16
It is important to note that none of the images available on the Jim Crow Museum
                    website are tagged with metadata enabling visitors to search for them using
                    criteria other than their stereotype. For instance, if I wanted to see all
                    examples of ceramics or advertisements, I would have to sort through all the
                    images discretely. Pilgrim explains that the construction of a public database
                    containing more complete records for the museum is underway [Pilgrim 2017]. While this will provide an interface to permit
                    searching, the records for the entire collection will never be made publicly
                    available online. In fact, database access may even be restricted to members of
                    the Ferris State University community. The editorial decision to include
                    educational context about the legacy of racism first, and access to images and
                    examples as a means of supporting this message second, exemplifies the value of
                    heavy editing for supporting the cause of social justice.

                17
Like many archivists tasked with cataloguing offensive subject matter, Pilgrim is
                    wary of enabling racists rather than defeating them. He is well aware that some
                    persons may use the Jim Crow Museum website as a distributor of hateful images,
                    rather than an educational tool. If the website’s caricatures appear remixed on
                    tee shirts and posters then they perpetuate the historical injustices they were
                    meant to combat. In fact, unlike many other museums that highlight unique and
                    rare objects from the collection to attract visitors, the Jim Crow Museum makes
                    it a policy to keep its rare collections offline [Pilgrim 2017].
                    All the images accessible on the site can be found elsewhere on the Internet
                    without trouble. Pilgrim deliberately keeps these records of hate outside the
                    grasp of well- and ill-intentioned visitors alike because an inclusive database
                    is unnecessary for accomplishing the primary aims of this institution. Because
                    the mission of this museum is public education and challenging racism in
                    contemporary culture, a complete database of Mammy objects is superfluous to the
                    work of demonstrating this caricature’s role as “a figment of the white imagination, a nostalgic
                            yearning for a reality that never had been”
                         [Pilgrim 2000, P9]. While the absence of a public database may hinder some researchers, it
                    achieves the museum’s objectives for the public admirably. 

                18
The structure of Pilgrim’s Jim Crow Museum suggests that the key to social
                    justice is the curation of digitized archival materials through thoughtful and
                    well-researched annotations. Several other archives and museum websites devoted
                    to hateful visual objects adopt strategies similar to these. Websites for the
                    Center for Holocaust and Genocide Studies (CHGS) at the University of Minnesota
                    as well as the HarpWeek Cultural History feature
                    titled “Toward Racial Equality: Harper’s Weekly Reports on Black America, 1857-1874”
                    both contain relatively few objects (less than 100) and use disclaimers and
                    critique to contextualize historical objects. Hateful images of African
                    Americans, Native Americans, Jewish peoples, Roma and Sinti (Gypsies) appear in
                    CHGS’s “Visualizing Otherness” series, and
                    disclaimers accompany the first two categories. In the second instance, for
                    example, editors include a note stating: 
                        Many of the images shown here are offensive to
                            Native-Americans. However, they are shown because they represent means
                            within popular culture by which the sense of inferiority was imposed on
                            Native-Americans during the period after the defeat of Native peoples on
                            the Great Plains and the establishment of the ‘Reservation’ system by
                            the Federal Bureau of Indian Affairs.
                         [CHGS 2017, P1]
                    

 The images accompanying this disclaimer include toy sets, cigar bands,
                    and historic photographs in the first set, while contemporary Cleveland Indians,
                    Kansas City Chiefs, and Atlanta Braves merchandise dominates the second. Minimal
                    descriptive tags accompany images in both sets, and there are no means in place
                    to search these images: their position in an archive devoted to
                        “Otherness” subsumes competing significance or research
                    criteria (artist, medium, dimensions, etcetera).

                19
HarpWeek, an archive indexing the illustrated
                    American periodical Harper’s Weekly (1857-1916),
                    accompanies “Toward Racial Equality,” with an
                    editorial “Warning” beginning: “Website visitors should be warned that several of the
                            words, descriptions, and images from Harper’s
                                Weekly are considered racially offensive by today’s
                            standards”
                         [CHGS 2017, P1]. Harpweek assumes that any contemporary
                    visitor, and not just those members of the oppressed group (as is the case with
                    the CHGS disclaimer), may find this content traumatic. Like all of the archives
                    containing hateful content that my project considers, editors contend that the
                    need to digitize offensive materials outweighs the implied argument to veil
                    these histories. In fact, my research uncovered no counter to this claim among
                    academics excepting Gates’s assertion that some persons he knows: “think the whole lot [of racist memorabilia] should be
                            assembled into one gigantic bonfire, incinerated, and the ashes buried
                            in an impenetrable vault, or strewn over the broadest reach of the
                            deepest ocean never to be displayed again”
                         [Gates 2013, P2]. Digital archivists and museum curators seem to argue with a single voice
                    that collecting and critiquing offensive objects is necessary for generating
                    positive change; what differs is how this content is framed. Harpweek’s warning continues: “The materials are presented in order to give a true
                            historical picture of the leading 19th-century newspaper’s view of black
                            Americans. We at HarpWeek hope this site
                            will serve as a valuable resource which provides an important
                            perspective on the multifaceted history of black Americans, generates a
                            deeper understanding and respect for the subject, and sparks further
                            interest in its study and discussion”
                         [CHGS 2017, P1]. In point of fact, this site includes not only this general disclaimer,
                    but also a statement written by Randall Kennedy, a law professor at Harvard
                    University, about the necessity of using, and not censoring, the term
                        “nigger” in historical archives. While these warnings
                    absolve the site of disseminating racist ideas and materials, it is the
                    editorial critique–the timelines, introductory essay, and notes accompanying
                    scanned illustrations–that permit “Toward Racial
                        Equality” to create a space for activism and justice. 

                20
Because editors at Harpweek are aware of the hurt
                    racist historical objects continue to inflict, however good the archivist’s
                    intentions, many of the collected Harper’s Weekly
                    illustrations published during the 1850s, 60s, and 70s include contextual
                    information beyond the titles and publication dates. While text from Harper’s Weekly accompanies some of the illustrations,
                    which may inform readers of the image’s content and the artist’s identity, a few
                    go so far as to include editorial notes. For instance, “The
                        Louisiana Murders–Gathering The Dead And Wounded” illustration shows
                    two white men on horseback observing numerous African Americans, several of whom
                    are apparently injured or dead. Because the solemn scene does not include text,
                    a note explains that the illustration shows the 13 April 1873 Colfax Massacre,
                    which claimed the lives of 70 black men during southern Reconstruction. This
                    note helps visitors to make sense of an illustration depicting a terrible but
                    largely forgotten incident in United States history. This content adds much
                    needed historical background to an archive concerned with sharing how
                    subscribers to Harper’s Weekly perceived African
                    Americans, which factors into the website’s rhetorical framing journey
                        “toward racial equality.” However, beyond the general
                    categories of “Slavery,”
                    “Civil War,”
                    “Reconstruction,” and “Culture &
                        Society”–sections that accord to the Timelines portion of the
                    site–without access to the paid HarpWeek database
                    there is no way to search them based on criteria such as content, artist, or
                    dimensions within the feature “Toward Racial Equality.”
                

                21
There can be no doubt that the websites for the educational and social justice
                    promoting Jim Crow Museum, the CHGS, and HarpWeek’s
                        “Toward Racial Equality” use disclaimers, notes,
                    and essays critiquing stereotypes to treat offensive and traumatic images in a
                    sensitive and critically engaged manner. Accountability is a primary concern for
                    these archives, which their editors admirably and unceasingly aim to promote.
                    These projects all use a form of heavy annotation to give voice to historically
                    oppressed groups, but in order to control the narrative these sites also forego
                    the database’s searchable structure. While it is possible to search within any
                    of these websites using Google grammar (“site:syntax”), these
                    hypertext sites adopt the strategy of sorting images by editorial commentary
                    rather than descriptive metadata tags. Visitors are discouraged from searching
                    for specific archived images because on the whole the metadata attached to
                    objects within these three sites is generally limited to image titles and dates.
                    Usually excluded from these digital records is specific information about, say,
                    the artist, dimensions, material, style, or a description of content and subject
                    matter (tree, water, war, love). In “Toward Racial
                        Equality,” for example, it would be difficult to identify all
                    illustrations by a specific artist quickly or conclusively. Displaying objects
                    representing hateful ideas beside thoughtful criticism at the expense of
                    searchability is a calculated decision, but I wonder if annotations and critique
                    of hateful historical content might coexist in the resources and metadata of a
                    database.

            

            
                Metadata Tags as “Heavy Editing”

                22
Can the structure of a database simultaneously serve the goals of public
                    education, social justice, and academic research? The call to amass and critique
                    artifacts documenting past inequities made by Gates and Pilgrim, among others,
                    is opposed to current digital humanities and archival practice in three
                    significant ways. First, adding digital tags addressing identity politics
                    relating to race, class, gender, and religion, beyond the most blatant examples
                    of bigotry, moves the archive away from objective and mimetic documentation of
                    the past and into the realm of subjective editorializing. What seems biased and
                    hateful to some audiences may appear disinterested and inoffensive to others.
                    Second, because all historical objects reflect in some degree the ideology of
                    the era in which they were created, labeling these ideas using metadata tags
                    might be construed as heavy-handed and unnecessary. For example, if, as Tara
                    McPherson explains in “Why Are the Digital Humanities So
                        White?”, “race, particularly in the United States, is central to…
                            shaping how we see and know as well as the technologies that underwrite
                            or cement both vision and knowledge”
                         [McPherson 2012, 143], then because all historic images produced in the West that depict
                    non-white persons are ideologically complicit in the discourse of race it is
                    needless to tag images using the Library of Congress subject headings of
                        “race” or even “racism.” Ostensibly in
                    the West this argument extends to gender, class, and sexuality among other
                    social and identity categories. Third, archivists and curators are
                    understandably hesitant to preserve and disseminate materials that might cause
                    offense. Although many museums possess racist objects, these are often buried in
                    backrooms and basements, and away from all visitors and donors. The
                    institutional marginalization of trauma-causing objects persists online. In
                    fact, humanist archivists have been a driving force behind digitizing many
                    non-canonical and often hateful historical objects and texts because “[w]orks widely held as cultural treasures are more
                            likely to be digitized than acutely problematic material”
                         [Gailey 2011, 137]. Humanists motivated to integrate politicized and identity-driven
                    information about historical collections have arguably done as much as those in
                    the library and museum science field to think through the question of social
                    justice and the digital archive. Although texts out of the library sciences like
                        Museum Frictions
                    [Karp et al. 2006] and Exhibiting Cultures
                    [Karp and Lavine 1991] have contributed greatly to developing ideas about the
                        “museum of conscience,” the difficult task of creating
                    digital archives concerned with offensive objects is truly interdisciplinary. To
                    advance the cause of social justice, literary and cultural studies and digital
                    humanities scholars have much to learn from digital preservationists and library
                    and information scientists, and vice versa.

                23
Because metadata has such significant consequences on scholars, digital
                    archivists must take the issue of metadata creation seriously–particularly when
                    tagging traumatic material in databases. Scaffolding the viewing experience for
                    both popular and academic audiences requires integrating the disclaimers,
                    contextual essays, and lesson plans for sites like the Jim Crow Museum of Racist
                    Memorabilia with database searchability. As I mentioned in the introduction of
                    this article, one project that foregrounds this concern in innovative ways is
                    Gailey’s Race and Children’s Literature of the Gilded Age
                        (RCLGA). Gailey and her collaborators
                    at Washington University in St. Louis facilitate searching by adding TEI tags.
                    In the case of the Reconstruction era Uncle Remus children’s books by Joel
                    Chandler Harris (1848-1908), the team essentially translated the stereotypically
                    exaggerated vernacular of the African American characters into regularized
                    English. This extra, or “heavy,” inscription makes the
                    database more accessible to humans and computers alike. For instance,
                    regularizing Harris’s phrase “ole Brer Wolf want ter eat de little Rabs”
                    allows visitors to find this passage by searching for the word
                        “rabbit”
                    [Gailey 2011, 135]. Strategies for enabling searches
                    including “heavy editing” through TEI or database tags like
                    those used by the Pitt Rivers Museum supports traditional academic researches
                    while opening up new avenues for discovery. Comprehensive search criterion not
                    only facilitates precise historical investigations, it also streamlines the
                    types of distant reading and data mining that digital humanists use to create
                    sophisticated visualizations and models. 

                24
Gailey and her team’s technique for making the content of the database more
                    accessible stops short of actually critiquing Harris, whose fictions made
                    apologies for slavery and were responsible for creating many stereotypes about
                    African Americans that persist into the present day. The RCLGA does not use TEI to point out or respond to the racist
                    aspects of the archive. Gailey argues that “heavy editing” by
                    way of a dual transcription–recording Harris’s words and their translation to
                    regularized English–allows the RCLGA to maintain
                    editorial objectivity because it “makes no claim about the rightness or wrongness of the
                            readings, only how standardized their spellings are”
                         [Gailey 2011, 136]. This concern with objectivity aligns the project with the Pitt Rivers
                    Museum more so than the Jim Crow Museum, the CHGS, and HarpWeek. While social justice is not a central concern for the
                    archive, education certainly is. Gailey explains that: “Because of the controversial nature of these works and
                            the variety of audiences the edition may draw, the editors plan to
                            provide multiple methods of access to the editions. One track would be
                            geared toward elementary schoolers and their teachers, another toward
                            high schoolers, and one, of course, for scholarly readers, each with its
                            own level and kind of editorial intervention”
                         [WUSTL 2017]. In this way the structure of the RCLGA
                    database facilitates educators at the primary and secondary level, rather than
                    assuming that only researchers will view these texts without support. Gailey and
                    her team acknowledge the offensiveness of the material and have designed the
                    project to scaffold the experience of multiple types of visitors. This strategy
                    supports audiences from academic settings well by providing the context
                    necessary for instructors to use the archive, hopefully with the intention of
                    advancing the message of social justice in their classrooms. How the
                    illustrations archived in the site will factor into this project remains to be
                    seen. Although Gailey does not address the question of heavy editing as it
                    relates to the illustrations archived in the RCLGA,
                    I extend the “heavy editing” approach to the project of making offensive
                    archived images both searchable and contextualized for educators and researchers
                    alike. 

                25
As the director and editor of Visual Haggard, a
                    digital archive dealing with the type of images historically complicit in
                    Western systems of oppression, “heavy” descriptive metadata
                    tags provide an obvious avenue for adding contextual and categorical information
                    useful for all audiences and allied to the cause of social justice. Visual Haggard is intended to centralize and improve
                    access to the illustrations of popular Victorian novelist and imperialist H.
                    Rider Haggard (1856-1925). The archive contains over 1,300 images and receives
                    approximately 1,500 page views every month. Visual
                        Haggard has recently passed peer review with NINES, the Networked Infrastructure for
                        Nineteenth-Century Electronic Scholarship. Tagging every
                    illustration to describe its subject matter has been one of the most significant
                    initiatives of Visual Haggard. Inspired
                    particularly by the long-running William Blake
                        Archive, which boasts the most complete and effectively tagged
                    images of any academic database, the metadata accompanying each image on Visual Haggard moves beyond the objective categories
                    of artist, novel, edition, page number, date of publication, publisher,
                    publication city, and image source (specific libraries, athenaeums, or private
                    collections). With the assistance of undergraduates at the Georgia Institute of
                    Technology enrolled in my English 1102 course, “Visual
                        Culture, Digital Archives and H. Rider Haggard,” I am in the process
                    of tagging all objects visible in these illustrations (window, horse, hat,
                    tree), the setting (continent, country, house, forest), the names of all
                    depicted characters, the posture and expression of characters, the number of
                    human figures (e.g. 1 figure, 3 figures, crowd), and the style of art
                    (Pre-Raphaelite, Symbolist), to name a few categories. But in addition to these
                    descriptive tags, the database will also include searchable tags for critical
                    themes relating to identity and social justice.

                26
The need to tag and contextualize images dealing with race and racism in the
                        Visual Haggard database has become increasingly
                    apparent in recent years. As an avid imperialist best known for his time spent
                    in South Africa, Haggard’s views towards race were complex and influential.
                    While the novelist became deeply enamored with the language, history, and
                    culture of the Zulu people, he also expressed stereotypically bigoted disdain
                    towards what he termed Kafirs (also spelled Kaffirs; a racist term for black
                    Africans in South Africa), Hottentots (an offensive term for the Khoikhoi
                    peoples), and half-castes (a derogatory phrase suggesting the inferiority of
                    mixed-race people which formed a part of anti-miscegenationist rhetoric). The
                    heroic and neoclassical appearance of the Zulus depicted by Haggard’s
                    illustrators seems to reflect the novelist’s admiration for these “Romans of Africa”
                         [Pocock 1993, 21]. However, scenes showing white men aiming their firearms at unarmed
                    native servants, or slaughtering scores of brown men of African, South American,
                    or Middle Eastern descent serve as terrible cultural records of imperialism’s
                    violence and racism in the West. The artworks Visual
                        Haggard collects are graphic reminders of the ideological work that
                    adventure fictions like King Solomon’s Mines (1885)
                    and She (1887) accomplished. The pictures that
                    accompanied Haggard’s popular stories advanced the idea of Empire among British
                    and American audiences, and the archive’s metadata must reflect this.

                27
Visitors can learn about this novelist’s general attitudes and prejudices
                    regarding race, imperialism, and gender from Visual
                        Haggard’s editor’s statement and biography of Haggard. However,
                    encountering these illustrations and deciphering their import often occurs on an
                    image-by-image basis as each illustration archived in the database possesses a
                    unique take on these themes. For this reason, Visual
                        Haggard uses the Disqus commenting application for individual
                    images. Towards the bottom of every illustration’s hypertext page, expert and
                    lay visitors to the archive may contribute commentary and glosses. These
                    individualized annotations democratize the process of creating and disseminating
                    contextual information, however flawed and subjective, which is especially
                    helpful for annotating offensive objects. For instance, I recently added a
                    Disqus comment to Visual Haggard that historicizes,
                    defines, and critiques the racist slur “Kafir” that appears
                    on the illustration for Haggard’s The Witch’s Head
                    (1884) titled “A shapely Kafir girl.” Although I
                    assessed this offensive image created by artist Charles Kerr (1858-1907) in an
                    article for the Journal of Victorian Culture Online
                    [Holterhoff 2013], integrating critique into the interface of the
                    archive educates and promotes social justice for a broader audience (those who
                    might stumble upon the archive rather than access it deliberately).
                    Non-academics form an unlikely audience for periodicals like the JVC, so contextual information about offensive content
                    should be immediately accessible for the archive’s users. While Disqus comments
                    offer one means for reaching a general audience, critical audio guides for
                    select illustrations created by Georgia Tech undergraduates and supported by
                    Knight Lab’s SoundCite JS are also in the works. In addition to these strategies
                    for adding contextual information to the site, I use metadata to identify and
                    group critically significant images.

                28
How to tag offensive because racist or sexist images has been a contentious issue
                    for Visual Haggard since the archive’s early days.
                    Historically, I have tagged images of Africans using the descriptive words
                        “race” and “African,” but recently I
                    have begun to add the more critically weighty term “racism”
                    in cases where illustrators depict black characters as victims of violence or
                    exploitation. Adding this tag–which can be searched for using the site’s search
                    bar–makes the bigotry of Haggard and his illustrators more visible. Tagged
                    examples of “racism,” like other critical tags concerning
                    identity and oppression such as “sexism,” will likely be of
                    the greatest interest to scholars. However, these tags may also serve to educate
                    curious nonacademic visitors while promoting justice through identifying and
                    contextualizing histories of subjugation. Of course, the value and usefulness of
                    these terms is subjective and not without problems. To begin, Visual Haggard only permits plain string wildcard
                    searching, so although searching for “gender” or
                        “racism” works well, typing “race”
                    into the search bar will also turn up “embrace,”
                    “disgrace,” and “Horace” (a protagonist of
                    Haggard’s She). More theoretically, this archive’s
                    critical tags will certainly shift to reflect a variety of voices as
                    interpretations of well-studied images change and less-studied images
                    proliferate. But, however imperfect, critical tags provide a worthwhile layer of
                    editorial critique. 

                29
Ambiguity makes Visual Haggard a valuable tool in
                    the undergraduate classroom for provoking discussion about ideology and the
                    cultural history of the “Scramble for Africa,” as students
                    are eager to weigh-in on appropriate labels for these texts and artworks.
                    However, this same resistance to a singular or even limited set of
                    interpretations makes tagging the illustrations archived on the site
                    challenging. In the case of the imminently problematic image “A shapely Kafir girl,” I not only use the tags
                        “race” and “racism,” but also
                        “gender” and “sexism” because, in
                    addition to using a racial slur, this illustration depicts two white men leering
                    at an objectified African woman’s body. Here, the archivist is alleviated from
                    the burden of interpretation, as Haggard’s own words point to, and likely guided
                    the design for, this image’s racist and sexist undertones. Yet in the remainder
                    of the archive the issue of descriptive metadata tags is seldom so clear-cut. I
                    elect to use the term “race” far more often than
                        “racism” because Haggard and his illustrators’ complex
                    ideas about Africans, and especially the numerous heroic if stereotyped Zulu
                    warrior characters, make determining the appropriateness of this label
                    difficult. By applying the paradigm of “heavy editing” to
                    illustrations through Disqus comments, metadata tags, and eventually audio
                    guides, I have begun to make arguments and scaffold user experiences in a manner
                    that explicates critical content in these illustrations to enhance the site’s
                    ability to educate and promote justice.

                30
It is worth noting that Visual Haggard does not use
                    racial slurs as tags. While the Jim Crow Museum uses offensive historical
                    language for the purpose of educating visitors, because the role of racism and
                    sexism in Haggard’s illustrations is more subtle and ideological I adopt
                    accepted cultural studies and Library of Congress keywords as database tags.
                    Although “kafir” does appear as a searchable tag owing to
                    Kerr’s image caption, I have avoided other opportunities in which this term–a
                    frequent one in Haggard’s lexicon–might appear. Consider Russell Flint’s
                    illustration from King Solomon’s Mines of Allan
                    Quatermain and the African character Jim titled “I saw
                        Neville’s wagon move off. Presently Jim came back running”
                    [Flint 1907]. At an earlier point in the text Haggard labels Jim
                        “a Kafir hunter” explicitly [Haggard 2007, 15]. Therefore, readers are meant to interpret Jim’s actions in terms
                    of this defining characteristic whenever he features in the plot. However, I
                    have not elected to do so because once I add “kafir” to the
                    list of descriptive tags attached to this image I will have perpetuated and in a
                    sense authored this term afresh. Because Flint never uses the word
                        “kafir,” and his depiction of Jim is not violent or
                    otherwise obviously “racist,” I instead tag this image with
                        “African” and “race,” and I leave the
                    task of interpreting Jim's representation in text and image to scholars.
                    Illustrations are never mimetic, so this archive's metadata should concern the
                    ideological content of images and their accompanying captions alone, rather than
                    the entirety of Haggard’s text. While Visual
                        Haggard must always be simultaneously over- and under-determined by
                        “heavy editing,” editor’s statements, and Disqus
                    comments, the richness of this digital archive’s metadata and Disqus comment
                    creation process–an accretive project which will remain perpetually incomplete
                    and unsettled–aspires to facilitate literary, cultural studies, digital
                    humanities, and art history scholarship at the same time the archive looks to
                    hold itself accountable to the historically disenfranchised groups traumatized
                    by the objects this site archives.

                31
In this essay I have wrestled with the issue of how digital archivists might best
                    use metadata and annotations to sort and contextualize offensive–and
                    particularly racist objects–in a manner that educates the public, supports
                    social justice, and facilitates scholarly research. I suggest that archivists
                    and curators do well to move away from relying wholly upon disclaimers in order
                    to be held accountable to and act as allies for oppressed groups and persons.
                    Museums, libraries and archives that enhance the world’s cultural heritage by
                    making its collections available online often wrestle with questions relating to
                    digitizing and making traumatic materials accessible. Yet as the metadata of
                    digital archives increasingly forms a significant portion of data mining and
                    digital humanities projects, curators must evaluate shifts in the value and use
                    of the digitized collections they control. 

                32
For individuals working to create and sustain digital archives, the concerns
                    articulated in my article are practical, imminent, and must be weighed
                    thoughtfully. Although the process of adding substantial contextual metadata to
                    archives can be time consuming and expensive, I have argued that by prioritizing
                    problematic materials and viewing metadata as a process rather than a conclusive
                    endpoint, heavy editing can allow for a more sensitive approach to digitizing
                    and making historical objects accessible. I take seriously Tara McPherson’s
                    warning: “Today, we risk adding the digital humanities to our
                            proliferating disciplinary menus without any meaningful and substantial
                            engagement with fields such as gender studies or critical race
                            theory”
                         [McPherson 2012, 150]. It is my hope that this paper advances scholarly conversation about the
                    relationship of digital archivists to traumatic materials at the same time it
                    suggests some best practices for allowing metadata to contribute to the cause of
                    justice.

            

        
        
            

        
    

Notes
[1]  Eyman and Ball are overwhelmingly concerned with textual design, but
                    their argument extends to all digital projects that rely on visual objects. See
                    also, [Cope and Kalantzis 2000]
                    [Eaves 2009, P20]
                    [Whitson and Salter 2015, P5].
[2] Gibson's statement does not address questions of appropriation
                        expressed by postcolonial and race theorists.

Works Cited
Byrne 1895 Byrne, P.M. 1895. “Letter 7,” May 24.
                    Pitt Rivers Museum Manuscript Collections. https://www.prm.ox.ac.uk/manuscripts/spencer_byrne.html.
CHGS 2017 “Visualizing Otherness
                        IV: Set 1.” 2017. Center for Holocaust &
                        Genocide Studies. University of Minnesota. Accessed January 2. http://chgs.umn.edu/histories/otherness/otherness4-1.html.
Coote 2016 Coote, Jeremy. 2016. “Question about Object Collection Disclaimer,” July
                    27.
Cope and Kalantzis 2000 Cope, Bill, and Mary
                    Kalantzis. 2000. Multiliteracies: Literacy Learning and the
                        Design of Social Futures. New York: Routledge.
D&D Resources D&D Resources. 2008.
                        “International Coalition of Historic Site Museums of
                        Conscience.”
                    National Coalition for Dialogue & Deliberation.
                    December 24. http://ncdd.org/rc/item/2144.
Eaves 2009 Eaves, Morris. 2009. “Picture Problems: X-Editing Images 1992-2010.”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly 3 (3). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/3/000052/000052.html.
Elkins 1998 Elkins, James. 1998. On Pictures and the Words That Fail Them. Cambridge;
                    New York: Cambridge University Press.
Eyman and Ball 2015 Eyman, Douglas, and Cheryl
                    Ball. 2015. “Digital Humanities Scholarship and Electronic
                        Publication.” In Rhetoric and the Digital
                        Humanities, edited by Jim Ridolfo and William Hart-Davidson, 65–79.
                    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Flint 1907 Flint, Russell. 1907. “I Saw Neville’s Wagon Move Off. Presently Jim Came Back
                        Running.”
                    Visual Haggard. http://www.visualhaggard.org/illustrations/664.
Gailey 2011 Gailey, Amanda. 2011. “A Case of Heavy Editing, The Example of Race and Children’s
                        Literature in the Gilded Age.” In The American
                        Literature Scholar in the Digital Age, edited by Amy E Earhart and
                    Andrew Jewell. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Gates 2013 Gates, Henry Louis. 2013. “Should Blacks Collect Racist Memorabilia?”
                    The African Americans: Many Rivers to Cross.
                    January 15. http://www.pbs.org/wnet/african-americans-many-rivers-to-cross/history/should-blacks-collect-racist-memorabilia/.
Gibson 2005 Gibson, William. 2005. “God’s Little Toys.”
                    Wired. July 1. https://www.wired.com/2005/07/gibson-3/.
Graban 2013 Graban, Tarez Samra. 2013. “From Location(s) to Locatability: Mapping Feminist Recovery
                        and Archival Activity through Metadata.”
                    College English 76 (2): 171–93.
Haggard 2007 Haggard, H. Rider. 2007. King Solomon’s Mines. Edited by Robert Hampson. New
                    York: Penguin.
Harpweek 2017 “Toward Racial
                        Equality: Harper’s Weekly Reports on Black America, 1857-1874.””
                    2017. Accessed January 2. http://blackhistory.harpweek.com/1Introduction/IntroLevelOne.htm.
Holterhoff 2013 Holterhoff, Kate. 2013. “Ethics and the Digital Archive: The Case for Visualizing H.
                        Rider Haggard.”
                    Journal of Victorian Culture Online. October 21.
                        http://blogs.tandf.co.uk/jvc/2013/10/21/ethics-and-the-digital-archive-the-case-for-visualizing-h-rider-haggard/.
IMLS 2015 “Mukurtu Software Preserves Indigenous
                    Digital Heritage through Technologies of Today.” 2015. Institute of Museum and Library Services. November 13. https://www.imls.gov/news-events/project-profiles/mukurtu-software-preserves-indigenous-digital-heritage-through.
Johnson 2016 Johnson, Jessica Marie. 2016. “The Digital in the Humanities: An Interview with Jessica Marie
                        Johnson Interview by Melissa Dinsman.”
                    Los Angeles Review of Books.
                    https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/digital-humanities-interview-jessica-marie-johnson/.
Karp and Lavine 1991 Karp, Ivan, and Steven Lavine,
                    eds. 1991. Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and Politics of
                        Museum Display. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Karp et al. 2006 Karp, Ivan, Corinne Kratz, Lynn
                    Szwaja, and Tomas Ybarra-Frausto, eds. 2006. Museum
                        Frictions: Public Cultures/ Global Transformations. Durham: Duke
                    University Press.
Manovich 2002 Manovich, Lev. 2002. The Language of New Media. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
                    Press.
Manovich 2007 Manovich, Lev. 2007. “Database as Symbolic Form.” In Database Aesthetics: Art in the Age of Information Overflow, edited
                    by Viktorija Vesna Bulajić, 39–60. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
                    Press.
McPherson 2012 McPherson, Tara. 2012. “Why Are the Digital Humanities so White?, Or, Thinking the
                        Histories of Race and Computation.” In Debates
                        in the Digital Humanities, edited by Matthew K Gold, 139–60.
                    Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Mulvaney 2000 Mulvaney, John. 2000. From the Frontier: Outback Letters to Baldwin Spencer.
                    St. Leonards, NSW: Allen & Unwin.
Pilgrim 2000 Pilgrim, David. 2000. “The Mammy Caricature.” October. http://www.ferris.edu/HTMLS/news/jimcrow/mammies/.
Pilgrim 2016 Pilgrim, David. 2016. “Jim Crow Museum.”
                    Ferris State University. Accessed December 29. http://www.ferris.edu/jimcrow/.
Pilgrim 2017 Pilgrim, David. 2017. Telephone
                    Interview.
Pitt Rivers Museum 2015 “Pitt Rivers Museum Databases.” 2015. Pitt
                        Rivers Museum. July 20. https://www.prm.ox.ac.uk/databases.
Pocock 1993 Pocock, Tom. 1993. Rider Haggard and the Lost Empire. London: Weidenfeld
                    and Nicoloson.
Sekula 2010 Sekula, Allan. 2010. “Reading an Archive: Photography Between Labour and
                        Capital.” In The Photography Reader,
                    edited by Liz Wells, 443–52. London: Routledge.
Shillingsburg 2014 Shillingsburg, Peter.
                    2014. “From Physical to Digital Textuality: Loss and Gain in
                        Literary Projects.”
                    CEA Critic 76 (2): 158–68.
WUSTL 2017 “Race and Children’s
                        Literature of the Gilded Age.” 2017. Washington
                        University at St. Louis Humanities Digital Workshop. Accessed
                    January 5. https://hdw.artsci.wustl.edu/projects/articles/33.
Wernimont 2013 Wernimont, Jacqueline. 2013.
                        “Whence Feminism? Assessing Feminist Interventions in
                        Digital Literary Archives.”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly 7 (1). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000156/000156.html.
Whitelaw 2015 Whitelaw, Mitchell. 2015. “Generous Interfaces for Digital Cultural Collections.”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly 9 (1). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/1/000205/000205.html.
Whitson and Salter 2015 Whitson, Roger Todd, and
                    Anastasia Salter. 2015. “Introduction: Comics and the
                        Digital Humanities.”” Digital Humanities
                        Quarterly 9 (4). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/4/000210/000210.html.
Zifcak 2012 Zifcak, Spencer. 2012. “The Emergence of WikiLeaks: Openness, Secrecy and
                        Democracy.” In More or Less: Democracy and New
                        Media, edited by Helen Sykes, 123–43. Albert Park: Future
                    Leaders.

2017 11.3
             | 
            XML
            | 
            Print Article


Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

 
            URL: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000324/000324.html
Last updated:
            
 Comments: dhqinfo@digitalhumanities.org
 Published by:
            The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
Affiliated with: Literary and Linguistic Computing
 Copyright 2005 - 
[image: Creative Commons License]
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
        


