[image: DHQ Logo]
[image: Digital Humanities Quarterly Logo]

homesubmissionsabout dhqdhq peoplecontact
 




Current Issue
	2017: 11.4

Preview Issue
	2018: 12.1

Previous Issues
	2017: 11.3
	2017: 11.2
	2017: 11.1
	2016: 10.4
	2016: 10.3
	2016: 10.2
	2016: 10.1
	2015: 9.4
	2015: 9.3
	2015: 9.2
	2015: 9.1
	2014: 8.4
	2014: 8.3
	2014: 8.2
	2014: 8.1
	2013: 7.3
	2013: 7.2
	2013: 7.1
	2012: 6.3
	2012: 6.2
	2012: 6.1
	2011: 5.3
	2011: 5.2
	2011: 5.1
	2010: 4.2
	2010: 4.1
	2009: 3.4
	2009: 3.3
	2009: 3.2
	2009: 3.1
	2008: 2.1
	2007: 1.2
	2007: 1.1

Indexes
	 Title
	 Author


[image: sidenavbarimg]ISSN 1938-4122

Announcements
	Call for Reviewers
	Call for Submissions


[image: button1-addthis.gif]

DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly
2017
Volume 11 Number 3
2017 11.3
                     | 
                    XML

| 
		   Discuss
			(
				Comments
			)
                



    
        
            
                
                Getting on the Map: A Case Study in Digital Pedagogy and
                    Undergraduate Crowdsourcing

                Shannon Kelley <skelley_at_fairfield_dot_edu>, Fairfield University

            
            

            
        
        
        
        
     


    
        
            Abstract

                
                This case study describes my experience implementing a digital writing assignment
                    in a traditional undergraduate literature classroom at Fairfield University
                    while in a pedagogical partnership with The Map of Early
                        Modern London, an award-winning, peer-reviewed digital humanities
                    mapping project housed at the University of Victoria. I argue that crowdsourcing
                    opportunities can offer a way for faculty at small liberal arts colleges and
                    universities to increase digital literacy among their students. I suggest that
                    such assignments be framed with supporting undergraduate coursework. I then
                    offer a series of preparatory steps and suggestions on how to modify an existing
                    course in ways that meet student learning outcomes pertaining to digital
                    literacy.


            

            
        
        
            
                I. Introduction

                1
When undergraduates add to an existing digital humanities project, do they
                    advance their own digital literacy? The answer to this question is not always
                    straightforward. The following case study offers advice, course design ideas,
                    and sample projects for faculty at small liberal arts colleges who are new to
                    digital humanities but who wish to participate in crowdsourcing. It provides an
                    overview of digital pedagogy (with special attention on early modern studies)
                    and its relationship to traditional English classroom instruction, arguing that
                    there is a growing need for digital literacy among undergraduates, and
                    encouraging existing opportunities to partner with doctoral and research
                    universities. I argue that these partnerships work best when crowdsourcing
                    participants engage in intentional reflection throughout the semester, produce
                    more than one multimodal text, and, for spatial humanities and digital mapping
                    projects, theorize mapmaking with secondary readings and activities. I present
                    my own experience at Fairfield University, where my students and I contributed
                    digital-born writing to an award-winning, peer-reviewed digital humanities
                    mapping project housed at the University of Victoria, The
                        Map of Early Modern London (MoEML) – a
                    process that began in Fall 2014 and ended in Summer 2016 when our first
                    publication, Bear Garden
                    https://mapoflondon.uvic.ca./BEAR1.htm, appeared on their
                    website.

            

            
                II. Preparing the Course: Undergraduates as Crowdsourcers

                2
Opportunities within early modern studies to partner with digital projects
                    through collective annotation, transcription, and digital writing abound. Early Modern Manuscripts Online (The Folger
                    Shakespeare Library) solicits manuscript transcriptions; Shakespeare His Contemporaries (Martin Mueller, Northwestern
                    University) aims to collaboratively digitize and curate non-Shakespearean plays;
                    and 18th-Connect (Texas A&M) helps scholars
                    prepare digital editions of eighteenth-century texts through collective
                    annotation. Such calls for collaboration have been called
                        “crowdsourcing,” which, for Rebecca Frost Davis, involves
                    far more than outsourcing menial tasks. For Davis, student participation in
                    crowdsourcing projects meets liberal arts learning outcomes by developing a
                        “habit of engagement with the (digital) humanities” which “may be the beginning of a pipeline that leads students
                            on to more sophisticated digital humanities research projects”
                         [Davis 2012]. By providing essential “skills and technology infrastructure,” such
                    as coding, artwork, media production, and data aggregation, the universities
                    that started digital projects have opened a gateway for the wider higher
                    education community to participate in digital humanities as collaborators and
                    creators rather than consumers [Alexander and Davis 2012]. Given different
                    institutional priorities, to develop and sustain a digital humanities site on
                    the same production scale as MoEML at small
                    colleges is generally cost-prohibitive. As Bryan Alexander and Rebecca Frost
                    Davis explain, digital humanities is a new, cross-departmental enterprise that “has largely been the creature of doctoral and research
                            universities (formerly Research-I under the Carnegie Classifications)
                            and several state campuses, at least on the high-profile production
                            end”
                         [Alexander and Davis 2012, 368]. While small liberal arts colleges or comprehensive universities focus on
                    teaching excellence, they can lack a critical mass of interested faculty and
                    digital humanities centers or labs to experiment, collaborate, or actualize an
                    idea on the scale of doctoral and research universities. Kathleen Fitzpatrick
                    identifies this work as “making archives, tools, or new digital methods”
                         [Fitzpatrick 2012, 13–14]. MoEML’s invitation to collaborate solves
                    the small liberal arts college’s resource gap, a worthwhile achievement in and
                    of itself. 

                3
However, individual instructors who participate must explain, integrate, and
                    justify adding a digital writing assignment to a traditional humanities course
                    so that the undergraduates whose labor benefits the partner institution maximize
                    their learning experience. Several preparatory steps taken on behalf of the
                    instructor strengthen the ability of students to learn from their work as
                    crowdsourcers. Instructors should significantly modify a traditional course, or
                    (ideally) design a new, standalone digital humanities course, such as a
                    practicum that emphasizes digital learning outcomes on the syllabus. A practicum
                    or series of new courses would allow her to think outside of the box of a
                    conventional fifteen-week semester since essays or transcriptions may require
                    more time for revision and the peer review process. Instructors could involve
                    more than one cohort of student-collaborators in sequential courses for the same
                    project. Finally, the course should foreground and reinforce digital literacy on
                    a smaller scale in related course activities and assignments, such as
                    opportunities to digitize objects, to engage in shorter digital writing tasks,
                    to understand, discuss, and reflect critically on the uniqueness of multimodal
                    writing, and–for spatial humanities projects such as MoEML–to read through the theory and history of mapmaking.
                    Adjusting the course in these ways will promote student learning outcomes that
                    pertain to increasing digital literacy, which I determined should be one of
                    crowdsourcing’s priorities in the undergraduate classroom.

                4
First, it helps to modify or design a humanities course that supports both the
                    time and the resources students need to write, revise, and publish a
                    peer-reviewed research paper as well as to learn digital humanities skills. At
                    the undergraduate level, a ten-member field practicum would have been ideal,
                    since practica bridge the professional world, where faculty publish critique,
                    and the classroom, where students receive grades. Wheaton College
                    undergraduates, for example, contribute episodes to The
                        History Engine (http://historyengine.richmond.edu/pages/) in a fascinating course
                    designed specifically for this work, “Junior Colloquium:
                        Historical Methods.” The practicum could be sequential (“Digital Humanities I” and “Digital
                        Humanities II”) to accommodate multiple revisions or false starts.
                    Alternately, the same course could run every term with fresh students, a model
                    wherein each cohort is responsible for revising their predecessors’ work after
                    peer review. In this model, students would remain in contact with one another,
                    but the first cohort would not be under obligation to contribute once they begin
                    new courses or graduate. Even if these contributions require more than fifteen
                    weeks, theorizing a student’s first draft as a partial, unfinished component of
                    a digital humanities project that an author might not experience beyond a single
                    term has unexpected benefits. A delayed pay-off presses an undergraduate to
                    reflect beyond instant gratification, individual terms, grades, and degrees, and
                    allows her to see collaborative intellectual labor in a long-term framework
                    wherein creating requires more investment than consuming. The critical research
                    skills she honed while sifting and organizing data on an unknown topic will, of
                    course, translate to the workplace and everyday world, as will her ability to
                    conceptualize technology as tool and object of study.

                5
Since crowdsourcing asks contributors to build on another institution’s project,
                    coursework ideally would include an opportunity for students to experiment with
                    digital writing (blogs, tweets, wikis) and humanities data analysis on a smaller
                    scale. The following strategies will give students experience making digital
                    tools by exposing them to methodology, theory, and practice. Before theorizing a
                    digital map, a critique of print maps and map-making would have helped, since
                    many undergraduates have no experience analyzing something as quotidian as a
                    map. However, Jean E. Howard reminds us that in the early modern period “maps were often considered rare and precious objects,
                            and seeing a map could be an important and life-changing event”
                         [Howard 2016, A11]. Maps are also never neutral. MoEML’s Agas
                    map privileges the center (St. Paul’s, as was typical), but why and how? Rhonda
                    Lemke Sanford’s introduction to early modern maps, “Conventions of Mapping: Centers, Peripheries, and Orientations,” in
                        Maps and Memory in Early Modern England, is a
                    way to deepen student appreciation of maps as historically contingent ways of
                    knowing and representing space [Sanford 2002, 4–11]. Students
                    could analyze or draw maps of their hometowns, and then question what they chose
                    to privilege, push to the margins, or exclude entirely before applying these
                    same question to the map of a foreign city. One of my colleagues, Sonya Huber,
                    invented a Google maps assignment (“Lyric Collaborative Map”)
                    with her creative writing students (https://sonyahuber.com/2015/03/30/essay-assignment-a-lyric-collaborative-map-of-campus/)
                    inspired by MoEML; this too would give students a
                    chance to experiment with a local spatial mapping project. Once students realize
                    that different centers are possible, as Sanford argues, they will begin to think
                    critically about the representation of spaces more familiar to them. A map’s
                    view usually closes off certain features of the city (slums, poverty, smoke,
                    sewers) and directs the gaze elsewhere. Knowing this fact allows students to
                    apply the same principle to their own entries. Where are we directed to look in
                    our specific research, and what is closed off from view? Once they see any map
                    as a malleable text, they can move with more ease to the more abstract question
                    of the MoEML digital Agas map as another new kind
                    of text, and begin to question how its digital medium both creates and limits
                    forms of understanding. 

                6
Critical thinking about maps would have prepared students for a spatial
                    humanities project, as would an assignment that digitized objects. A variety of
                    preliminary readings on non-linear networks, hypertext, and spatial humanities
                    could have contextualized individual contributions to MoEML, a site that changes constantly through its unique ID system.
                    Every time a new entry is uploaded, a new layer of information automatically
                    becomes linked to preexisting data; the older entries may change, or rather,
                    will change, since they may address information in new, as yet incomplete
                    entries. John Jentz captures this sense of change in his definition of the
                    digital humanities center at Marquette University as “a moving constellation of academic communities building
                            digital objects that interpret the human experience”
                         [Jentz 2013]. MoEML entries are also moving
                    constellations. There are many digital mapping assignments designed for the
                    undergraduate classroom that can reinforce their work for crowdsourcing projects
                    with preexisting digital infrastructures. One good example, from Kathryn
                    Crowther, currently at Georgia Perimeter College, asks students to work in
                    groups to choose a literary text and map it in any digital format. After she
                    gives a number of options (hypertext, annotated texts, Google map, text cloud)
                    Crowther reminds students “there should be an implicit argument” in their
                    projects: “the data you are mapping should give us new insight
                            into the text, or should provide us with a new way of looking at the
                            text that broadens our interpretation of it”
                         [Crowther n.d.].[1] Progress on
                    individual digitizing projects and the MoEML
                    assignment could be recorded on a project blog to publish work online within the
                    fifteen-week semester and to practice digital composition. Ideally, all
                    undergraduates at work on a digital humanities project such as MoEML that is housed at another instution could pool
                    their resources, collaborate, and learn together online.

                7
Finally, research proves faculty members too need to build communities of
                    practice. A digital tool such as a password-protected wiki or project blog
                    written by participating faculty could grow in tandem with the surface project.
                    In my cohort (Fall 2014), six or seven faculty members supervised undergraduate
                    labor; as a community, we could have shared tools, resources, and classroom
                    experiences. However, there was not a way to contact one another. As it stands,
                    faculty contributors pioneer their work alone. Although MoEML’s Research Guide covers an impressive range of concerns for
                    students and faculty, some pedagogical questions unique to faculty (Will we
                    allow our students to fail? How and when should we intervene? How can we grade
                    this project?) puzzled me. This would also be a place to address questions of
                    rank and tenure, where, as Bethany Nowviskie observes, junior scholars in
                    digital humanities “struggle to make their own new work look
                            enough like their forebears’ old work to earn a modicum of
                            employment stability”
                         [Nowviskie 2015]. From the beginning, it is helpful to know with clarity how a
                    born-digital article on the Bear Garden, for example, is fundamentally changed
                    by MoEML spatial mapping techniques and
                    internal/external links. There is an enormous amount of criticism on
                    bearbaiting, including several essays on MoEML;
                    what distinguishes ours? Undergraduates need to think through this question, but
                    it also pertains to tenure-track faculty with promotion and tenure criteria in
                    mind. The University of Nebraska’s Center for Digital Research in the Humanities
                    suggests that criteria for traditional print scholarship applies to digital
                    work, but that additional criteria exist: “Specifically, how does the digital component of the
                            humanities research contribute to its originality? What are the
                            implications in terms of audience, pedagogy, and the creation of
                            research tools?”
                         [CDRH 2016]. A new “culture of assessment” would acknowledge the
                    emergent value of peer-reviewed, digital-born scholarship among humanities
                    faculty [Rockwell 2011, 166]. By acknowledging and addressing
                    the needs of both faculty and students who contribute to a crowdsourcing
                    project, partnerships between doctoral universities and small liberal arts
                    colleges will thrive and continue to support undergraduate learning.

            

            
                III. Digital Pedagogy and The Map of Early Modern
                        London

                8
In Fall 2014, I asked my undergraduates at Fairfield University, a comprehensive
                    university in the Jesuit tradition in Fairfield, CT, to contribute to The Map of Early Modern London as part of their
                    regular course activities.[2] That year we joined a
                    handful of other classes at universities and colleges across the globe that
                    semester in pedagogical partnerships with the University of Victoria, nearly
                    five thousand miles away. If the students’ collaborative essays successfully
                    pass peer review, the articles will appear on The Map of
                        Early Modern London (https://mapoflondon.uvic.ca), a digital humanities project which
                    remediates the Civitas Londinum, or
                        “Agas” woodcut map of London, a famous bird’s-eye view of
                    the city associated with Ralph Agas, ca. 1561-1566, by annotating the entire
                        map.[3]
                    Although there are multiple ways to navigate this site, including an
                    encyclopedia, a library, a gazetteer, and a special section that will eventually
                    include digitized transcriptions of four editions of John Stow’s A Survey of London, the Agas map begs to be
                    investigated with more immediacy than the data organized in traditional search
                    fields. Most map entries refer to Stow’s chorographic Survey; listings should also include each street, building,
                    neighborhood, parish, or church’s literary significance, appearance in
                    contemporary map, print, or manuscript sources, and all extent historical
                    scholarship. The criteria of evaluation used by MoEML project directors align with those used by print-based
                    encyclopedias, but the results differ significantly. Toponyms, historical
                    persons, and primary and secondary sources in MoEML’s born-digital articles are hyperlinked within the site’s
                    growing database, providing web readers unique, non-linear paths of navigation
                    each time they access the entry. 

                9
In mid-summer 2014 MoEML accepted our request to
                    participate. Since my research fields are literary ecocriticsm, critical plant
                    studies, and the Italian Mannerist garden, MoEML
                    directors assigned Fairfield students the Agas map’s five gardens: Bear Garden,
                    Pike Garden, Paris Garden, Ely Place Garden, and Covent Garden. As we would
                    learn, only two of these spaces constituted gardens in the modern sense of the
                    term, while other spaces, such as Moorfields and Spring Garden, were known as
                    London’s first public parks during the period. However, the very thought that an
                    aquaculture operation (Pike Garden) or bearbaiting arena (Bear Garden) might be
                    called a garden led to productive conversations among students. Once I had our
                    assigned sites in July, I partnered with Fairfield research librarian Curtis
                    Ferree, who agreed to lead multiple workshops on finding digital and print
                    source material, organizing data, and responsible citation. Ferree was involved
                    with the assignment from the start, even reading through first drafts together
                    with me over coffee. To ensure that our library would support students on this
                    project, I ordered several books in advance and arranged to keep them on reserve
                    for the duration of the semester, although the lionshare of essential sources
                    were either peer-reviewed articles (often in history, architecture, or literary
                    journals) or older, out of print books published in the late nineteenth or early
                    twentieth centuries. 

                10
Due to my research trajectory that summer I did not research the Agas map’s
                    gardens in advance. In hindsight, however, such work is vital: despite the time
                    and assistance we gave students to gather appropriate resources, by mid-semester
                    their results were far from complete, even with the helpful MoEML Guide for Student Researchers (http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/research_guidelines.htm). As one wrote, it
                    was “extremely difficult to find information about topics or words I found in
                        my sources,” while another wrote, “when it was time for us to start
                        researching, I felt lost.” Given the time constraints on a fifteen-week
                    course and the enormous difficulty locating viable sources, I recommend
                    preparing each bibliography in advance.[4] When
                    working with undergraduates it is difficult to replicate the surge of time
                    required by the apprentice-model at the doctoral level. There was not enough
                    time to recover from false leads, while writing and revision of this caliber
                    requires time to ferment. In hindsight, I would have let the students try
                    independently and then provide the requisite titles. But this also speaks to a
                    decision I made early in the process that my students would be allowed to fail
                    (and some failed mightily, despite heroic effort) until the very end, but that I
                    would not forward articles deemed incomplete to MoEML. As a result, I did more than exercise significant editorial
                    intervention. I rewrote the article, deepening its research, which required me
                    to add my name as an author, but allowed me to reward also whatever labor my
                    students performed in fifteen weeks. 

                11
As I contemplated asking my undergraduates to create digital writing for another
                    university’s digital humanities project, I began to reexamine my pedagogical
                    assumptions. The course that I chose to implement this assignment was EN213:
                    Shakespeare I, an upper-division Shakespeare survey with an enrollment cap of
                    twenty-five. We met twice a week, and coursework centered on the eight comedies
                    and histories we read together. EN213 had three traditional learning objectives:
                    develop oral and written skills, learn to appreciate literature, and develop
                    creative capacities. Although I ask students to engage in performance-based
                    learning activities and then conclude the course when they stage 10-minute
                    scenes together, most of my pedagogical and assessment tools in the course are
                    traditional: a white paper essay, short-answer exam(s), and short lectures
                    followed by discussions. How would I create a learning objective that pertained
                    to a digital literacy, and how would that add or subtract from time spent on the
                    other three more traditional learning objectives? By asking these questions, I
                    was shifting the subject of investigation from digital humanities research to
                    pedagogy, which, for Brett D. Hirsch, is too often
                        “bracketed” or given the “the status of an afterthought, tacked onto a statement
                            about the digital humanities…often in parentheses”
                         [Hirsch 2012, 5]. 

                12
As David Lewin and David Lundie explain, “digital pedagogy” is
                    an emerging field of study that combines four overlapping fields: the philosophy
                    of technology and information theory, critical pedagogy, and educational
                    philosophy [Lewin and Lundie 2016, 235]. The field addresses
                    technological change from the perspective of education, and seeks to understand
                    how a rapid pace of innovation impacts educators and students alike. While some
                    acadmemics argue that technology revolutionizes teaching and learning, others
                    approach technology with more caution, and some are simply technophobic. In
                        “Why Teach Digital Writing,” WIDE (Writing in
                    Digital Environments) identifies common forms of resistance to digital writing
                    in the composition classroom: writing online should only happen once students
                    master print-based writing in linear essays; computer specialists should teach
                    all technology-related tasks; liberal arts education “should not succumb to
                        vocational training;” and the technological resources needed to teach
                    digital writing are cost-prohibitive [WIDE 2005]. For WIDE,
                    faculty can resolve concerns and opposition to digital pedagogy with support
                    from faculty development, which means “truly cultivating an ecology of digital
                    writing through a commitment to regular training sessions, mentoring approaches,
                    sustained software, hardware, and other support.”

                13
For some researchers in the field of education, the disciplined study of English
                    literature has always been experiential. Since so much of our experience occurs
                    while immersed in digital culture, it makes sense that we adapt an attitude of
                    critical reflection on the digital world while producing digital-born writing.
                    As David Ciccoricco and Bill O’Steen observe, English pedagogy was defined
                    broadly as “engagement with contemporary contexts” as early as 1935 [Ciccoricco and O'Steen 2005]. The teacher’s main role in this model (from
                    1935) is “that of a facilitator for experiences and not merely a dispenser of
                        requisite content.” In Professing and Pedagogy:
                        Learning the Teaching of English (2005), Shari Stenberg argues that
                    the professor is a “facilitator of student projects, a co-inquirer, a
                            learner”
                         [Hirsch 2012, 15]. Thus by asking students to co-author digital writing (or digital-born
                    writing) in a group project intended for publication on MoEML, I would be continuing a new variation of an older model of
                    teaching. Ciccoricco and O’Steen go on to acknowledge that most all texts today
                    rely on digital writing technologies for their production. In their course, they
                    developed a learning objective to capture student understanding of the
                    uniqueness of “digital rhetoric” on the web. That is, a form
                    of self-contained nodes (writing without long paragraphs) and internal and
                    external hyperlinks that allow users to forge unique pathways of reading
                    content, as opposed to a traditional paper medium, “which is resolutely linear
                        and hierarchical in organization.” With time to reflect on how this form
                    of writing differed from print essays, students could expect to exit the course
                    with a more pronounced digital literacy skillset.

                14
Reflection on the process of producing digital work is crucial in a variety of
                    learning contexts. When Troy Hicks examines the process of creating digital
                    portfolios, for example, he notes that simply collecting and digitizing an
                    archive of artifacts is not enough. Students need to reflect with intentionality
                    on how technology is integrated with each artifact throughout their digital
                    work, and to have some sense of how readers may navigate the site through
                    multi-linear pathways. Digital literacy, for Hicks, “involves the ability to view, read, and interact with
                            new media texts as well as to compose, design, and author them”
                         [Hicks 2005, 205]. Hicks wants student and teachers to see themselves as “web
                        writers” whose work appears in a “medium of constant change,”
                    while Ciccoricco and O’Steen coin the term “designwriters”
                    [Hicks 2005, 205]
                    [Ciccoricco and O'Steen 2005]. The New London Group emphasizes
                        “multimodal design.” All of these terms address the fact
                    that we use images and graphical elements (type set, color, size) differently in
                    digital work. With digital writing, design pertains to the imagetext on the
                    screen, but also the overall layout of the (external/internal) hyperlinked
                    essay, digital portfolio, or website. WIDE also prefers the term
                        “multimodal,” since, “today writing means selecting among and scripting
                            multiple media, including photographs, charts, videos, images, audio,
                            diagrams, hyperlinks, and more”
                         [WIDE 2005]. The practice of linking might be the most essential tool to promote
                    student understanding of how digital writing differs from other forms of
                    classroom experience. As Ciccoricco and O’Steen note, “through the practice of
                        linking,” students learn more about “intertextuality” and become
                    able to see “their own texts as being woven into a broader network of texts,
                        and not just the network of texts contained by” their particular class
                    web project “but also – through the permeations of external links –
                            that of the World Wide Web itself”
                         [Ciccoricco and O'Steen 2005].

                15
Collaborative knowledge creation would be essential for this project in other
                    ways too, since it required social participation: co-authoring material,
                    collaborative research methods, and the production of a hyperlinked essay that
                    connects with other writers across MoEML and the
                    Internet. For the New London Group, educators should recall the purpose of
                    pedagogy, which is “a teaching and learning relationship that creates the
                            potential for building learning conditions leading to full and equitable
                            social participation”
                         [The New London Group, 60]. Ideally, students leave the classroom better equipped to be citizens of
                    the world, and to express themselves in both “page-bound” and digital-born
                    formats. The New London Group suggests that the changing education environment
                    requires that we teach “multiliteracies,” a term that refers
                    to both “the multiplicity of communications channels and media,
                            and the increasing saliency of cultural and linguistic diversity”
                         [The New London Group, 63]. By researching “radical changes in working life,” rising global
                    citizenship and civic pluralism, and changes in private and public lives, the
                    New London Group makes the case for undergraduate curricular changes that
                    prepare students best for life after graduation. Considering the assignment’s
                    social dimension from the perspective of collaborative knowledge making and
                    global citizenship helps us put the new practice of crowdsourcing into a more
                    positive perspective.

                16
Several of my students identified MoEML’s permanence
                    and stability as the most appealing part of the project. One senior felt that it
                    was “so interesting to have a final project that doesn’t end up in a file
                        somewhere or sitting in a box with all my other final papers. I like how
                        even after the class is over this project will continue to evolve and
                        expand.” Another wrote that it was “validating” that the assignment
                    went “beyond our professor’s desk” for the public to use. And it should be
                    undergraduates who remediate the early modern archive, what Bethany Nowviskie
                    sees as “opening up lost or formerly inaccessible humanities information,”
                    for now they – and “formerly under-represented groups” – have the capacity
                    to see digitized texts once held in password protected databases, or to digitize
                    texts themselves [Nowviskie 2015].[5] The end result, moreover, helps curate MoEML, a tool that is freely available to users across
                    the globe.

                17
Despite their excitement in the overarching potential of this new platform,
                    students rightfully questioned how the project fit into existing course material
                    on Shakespeare. Only one of Shakespeare’s plays we read (Richard III) explicitly mentions one of our topics – Ely Place
                    garden, where Richard sends the Bishop to retrieve strawberries. As a
                    consequence, at least one student wrote that in “a Shakespeare course,” her
                    work on MoEML
                    “seems like historical outside fieldwork,” and she wished that the project
                        “was introduced more in relation to Shakespeare.” Such issues might be
                    avoided if our topics pertained directly to the theater, as many MoEML projects do, or if I had designed a new course
                    as an interdisciplinary digital humanities practicum housed in the English
                    department. Some of the assignment’s challenges derived from the fact that we
                    were engaged in historiography while in a literature course. Unlike the
                    conventional argument-driven close readings of literary texts that my students
                    feel comfortable writing, the crowdsourcing project requires students to locate,
                    judge, and organize large amounts of data as forensic historians. The task is
                    complicated by the fact that the Agas map is a static snapshot of London during
                    a period of nonstop change and growth. Few sites remain consistent during the
                    sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and some (including two of ours – Paris
                    Garden and Pike Garden) cannot be located definitively. Other sites we
                    researched began as concrete spaces, but ended as generic terms for altogether
                    different spaces, events, or activities. Often, we learned the
                        “cartographic evidence” did not concur with the recorded
                    configuration of buildings in archaeological evidence or historical documents
                        [Mackinder and Blatherwick 2000, 17]. In addition, my undergraduates
                    learned for the first time that historians disagree. While frustrating for
                    students, understanding sixteenth and seventeenth-century historical facts as
                    susceptible to strong debate eventually allowed them to grow as scholars.
                    Students who struggled (and they all did) with this realization found ways to
                    accommodate the unknown within their research. The map, tantalizingly friend and
                    foe, provided visual data that only applied to a very specific (pre-1570s) data
                    set in each entry.

                18
In hindsight, there are ways to jumpstart solutions to these traditional
                    undergraduate research dilemmas. By the second week, I would recommend asking
                    each student to survey 2-3 existing MoEML entries
                    and answer specific questions: how did the author(s) organize his or her data?
                    What data did they choose to include? What internal connections leap to the
                    surface? Is the entry readable, and where are its hyperlinks? I would ask
                    students to analyze the bibliography and share their results with classmates and
                    their own groups to develop target research questions. I would point to the
                    attempt by all contributors to write without bias or opinion, and I would stress
                    the need to stay within the allotted early modern time period even if momentous
                    events occur in the next century, as with the famous eighteenth-century theater
                    district, Covent Garden. Ironically, the research required in these encyclopedia
                    entries led students to regard the Internet with great skepticism: as one
                    student wrote, “I found it really difficult to trust anything we found
                        online,” while another stated “the internet is full of faulty
                        claims.” Sue Bennett, Karl Maton and Lisa Kervin’s study of the “snatch
                        and grab philosophy” predicts as much: “students’ everyday technology
                        practices,” including the instant gratification tied to social media and
                    most Internet searches, “may not be directly applicable to academic tasks”
                    that require critical thinking [Bennett et al. 2008, 781]. But as a
                    result, students evolved as researchers to the point where they saw the need to
                    confirm whatever they wrote via more than one scholarly article. The project was
                    most successful in this area, as one spoke of gaining “a better understanding
                    and respect for what faculty researchers do.”

                19
 By summer 2015, when I had the chance to revise my undergraduates’ work, it
                    became clear that our story as a contributing partner to this digital humanities
                    site was obvious: as city of London and its population grew in between 1550 and
                    1600 from 55,000 to 200,000 residents, the city lost fields, pastures, farms,
                    patches of wilderness, and gardens, many of which had been monastic land
                    dissolved by the crown during the Henrician Reformation [Howard 2016, A13].[6] We knew that
                    urbanization reduced London’s green spaces, but we could not prove it until we
                    dug into the data. By the end of the seventeenth century, our assigned fruit and
                    vegetable gardens (Covent Garden, Ely Place Garden, Paris Garden) had become the
                    ghosts of gardens, and open spaces were increasingly hard to find. As Norman G.
                    Brett-James writes, “whereas London was little more than the one square mile
                            in 1600, it had now grown in all directions and had swallowed up much of
                            the country in its immediate vicinity”
                         [Brett-James 1935, 467]. Using the “botanical rambles” recorded in John
                    Gerard’s Herball as a guide to urban wildlife,
                    Brett-James reminds us that citizens of London could hunt and shoot game within
                    easy reach of their houses before 1600 [Brett-James 1935, 447, 450]. J. Fairchild’s The City
                        Gardener (1727) even notes that most trees could not endure the
                    fumes resulting from burning sea-coal, the new fuel that replaced trees as the
                    source of the city’s energy. We had immersed ourselves in a very familiar story
                    of urban sprawl, pollution, and deforestation that speaks in compelling ways to
                    contemporary narratives of ecological crisis. However, this realization came too
                    late for Fairfield undergraduates to see given a fifteen-week semester. 

            

            
                IV. Conclusion

                20
 I learned that Fairfield undergraduates’ critical research skills grew
                    significantly when given the honor of publishing an online scholarly article on
                    early modern London’s gardens for a digital humanities project housed in a
                    research university. The success of MoEML’s digital
                    learning outcomes for its pedagogical partners at small universities and
                    colleges, however, depends on the course, its enrollment cap, and accompanying
                    mapping and digitizing assignments. In other words, a digital writing assignment
                    is not always enough to increase digital literacy; a more pronounced
                    understanding and implementation of digital pedagogy on behalf of the
                    contributing instructor makes the project more effective. Most of my
                    student-laborers graduated before I submitted entries to MoEML, so they did not revise or share in the success when the
                    articles were accepted (as two have been) and began to appear online. Indeed,
                        MoEML allies and crowd-sourced laborers for
                    other projects need to engage in multiple partnerships to be successful: we must
                    partner with librarians, college-wide curriculum committees, our departments
                    (whose members determine which types of courses we teach follow enrollment caps
                    set by administrators), and rank and tenure committees, whose members evaluate
                    the worth of long-term investment in undergraduate research and judge the status
                    of print, digital, or new media publications for promotion. But the results of
                    these partnerships far outweigh the complications of bringing about such accord.
                    When undergraduates emerge from the classroom with confidence and experience
                    expressing themselves in a digital environment, we equip them with training
                    relevant to careers, civic engagement, and living their public and private lives
                    in a dynamic digital culture. 

            

        
        
            
        
    

Notes
[1]  Crowther’s example applies to undergraduates. For a provocative
                        description of a graduate course co-taught by faculty in literary studies
                        and computer science, see [Engel and Thain 2015].
[2]  According to Carnegie classifications,
                        Fairfield is a comprehensive research university, as it includes a handful
                        of professional schools – Nursing, Business, Education and Allied
                        Professions, and Engineering. Fairfield has approximately 3,000
                        undergraduates and 500 graduate students.
[3]  For an introduction to the Agas map and its relationship to its
                        predecessor, Braun and Hogenberg’s Civitates Orbis
                            Terrarum, see [Marks 1964, 9–18].
[4]  I struggled with my students’
                        tendency to rely on Howard Roberts and Walter H. Godfrey’s Survey of London in British History Online when
                        there were better primary and secondary sources available.
[5]  In fall 2014, Fairfield’s
                        library did not subscribe to a key password-protected database, Early English Books Online, which made our work
                        difficult.
[6]  Data referring to London’s
                        population in the early modern period depends on what constitutes the
                        boundaries of the city, and is subject to debate.

Works Cited
Alexander and Davis 2012 Alexander, Bryan and
                    Rebecca Frost Davis. “Should Liberal Arts Campuses Do
                        Digital Humanities? Process and Products in the Small College World.”
                    In Debates in the Digital Humanities, ed. Matthew
                    K. Gold. 368-389. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2012.
Bennett et al. 2008 Bennett, Sue, Karl Maton and
                    Lisa Kervin. “The ‘Digital Natives’
                        Debate: A Critical Review of the Evidence.”
                    British Journal of Educational Technology 39.5
                    (2008), 775-786.
Brett-James 1935 Brett-James, Norman G. The Growth of Stuart London. London: George Allen
                    & Unwin Ltd., 1935.
CDRH 2016 Center for Digital Research in the
                    Humanities. Promotion & Tenure Criteria for Assessing
                        Digital Research in the Humanities. University of Nebraska. Accessed
                    19 August 2016. http://unlcms.unl.edu/cas/center-for-digital-research-in-the-humanities/articles/promotion.
Ciccoricco and O'Steen 2005  David Ciccoricco
                    and Billy O’Steen, “Digital Technology and English Pedagogy:
                        From Traditional Essays to a Fabric of Digital Text,”
                    Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric, Technology and Policy
                    13.1 (2005).
Clark 2010 Clark, J. Elizabeth. “The Digital Imperative: Making the Case for a 21st-Century
                        Pedagogy.”
                    Computers and Composition 27 (2010), 27-35.
Crowther n.d. Crowther, Kathryn. “Digital Mapping Project (Georgia Tech).” In Building Digital Humanities in the Undergraduate
                        Classroom
                    http://briancroxall.net/buildingDH/assignments/digital-mapping-project-georgia-tech/.
Davis 2012 Davis, Rebecca Frost. “Crowdsourcing, Undergraduates, and Digital Humanities
                        Projects.”
                    https://rebeccafrostdavis.wordpress.com/2012/09/03/crowdsourcing-undergraduates-and-digital-humanities-projects/.
Engel and Thain 2015 Engel, Deena and Marion Thain,
                        “Textual Artifacts and their Digital Representations:
                        Teaching Graduate Students to Build Online Archives.”
                    “Digital Humanities Quarterly” 9.1 (2015). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/1/000199/000199.html
Fitzpatrick 2012 Fitzpatrick, Kathleen.
                        “The Humanities, Done Digitally.” In Debates in the Digital Humanities, ed. Matthew K.
                    Gold. 12-15. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2012.
Hicks 2005  Troy Hicks, “Beyond
                        the ‘Bells and Whistles’: Toward a Visual Rhetoric for
                        Teachers’ Digital Portfolios,”
                    English Education 37.3 (2005).
Hirsch 2012 Brett D. Hirsch, “Introduction,” in Digital Humanities Pedagogy:
                        Practices, Principles and Politics. Open Book Publishers,
                    2012.
Howard 2016 Howard, Jean E. “Early Modern Map Culture.” In The Norton
                        Shakespeare 3rd Edition, Stephen Greenblatt, Walter Cohen, Suzanne
                    Gossett, Jean E. Howard, Katharine Eisaman Maus, and Gordon McMullan, eds. A13.
                    New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2016.
Jentz 2013 Jentz, John. “What
                        Would Marquette’s Digital Humanities Center Look Like?” (2013) http://epublications.marquette.edu/cah/Digital/Digital/3/.
Kelley et al. n.d. Kelley, Shannon, Cynthia
                    Alexandre, Emma Ford, Amanda Ocasio, and Brianna Perkins, “Bear Garden.” In The Map of Early Modern
                        London, ed. Janelle Jenstad. http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/BEAR1.htm.
Lewin and Lundie 2016  David Lewin and David
                    Lundie, “Philosophies of Digital Pedagogy,”
                    Studies in the Philosophy of Education 35 (2016). 
Mackinder and Blatherwick 2000 Mackinder,
                    Anthony and Simon Blatherwick. Bankside Excavations at
                        Benbow House Southward London SE1. London: Museum of London
                    Archaeology Service, 2000.
Marks 1964 Marks, Stephen Powys. The Map of Mid-Sixteenth Century London. London:
                    London Topographical Society, 1964.
Merkel 2003 Merkel, Carolyn Ash. “Undergraduate Research at the Research Universities.”
                    New Directions for Teaching and Learning 93 (Spring
                    2003), 39-53.
Nowviskie 2015 Nowviskie, Bethany. “On Capacity and Care.”
                    http://nowviskie.org/2015/on-capacity-and-care/#more-2793. 
Palfrey and Gasser 2011 Palfrey, John and Urs
                    Gasser, “Reclaiming an Awkward Term: What We Might Learn
                        from ‘Digital Natives’.” In Deconstructing Digital Natives: Young People, Technology and the New
                        Literacies, ed. Michael Thomas. 186-204. New York: Routledge,
                    2011.
Rockwell 2011 Rockwell, Geoffrey. “On the Evaluation of Digital Media as Scholarship,”
                    Profession 79 (2011), 152-168.
Sanford 2002 Rhonda Lemke Sanford, Maps and Memory in Early Modern England: A Sense of
                        Place, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.
Schantz 2008 Schantz, Mark S. “Undergraduate Research in the Humanities: Challenges and
                        Prospects,”
                    Council on Undergraduate Research 29.2 (Winter
                    2008), 26-29.
The New London Group The New London Group,
                        “A Pedagogy of Multiliteracies: Designing Social
                        Futures,”
                    Harvard Educational Review 66.1, (1996). 
WIDE 2005  Writing in Digital Environments (WIDE)
                    Research Center Collective, Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric,
                        Technology and Policy 10.1 (2005).

2017 11.3
             | 
            XML
            | 
            Print Article


Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

 
            URL: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000330/000330.html
Last updated:
            
 Comments: dhqinfo@digitalhumanities.org
 Published by:
            The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
Affiliated with: Literary and Linguistic Computing
 Copyright 2005 - 
[image: Creative Commons License]
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
        


