
[The following is the full text of an essay published in differences 25.1 (2014) 

as part of a special issue entitled In the Shadows of the Digital Humanities 

edited by Ellen Rooney and Elizabeth Weed. Duke UP’s publishing 

agreements allow authors to post the final version of their own work, but 

not using the publisher’s PDF. The essay as you see it here is thus a PDF 

that I created and formatted myself from the copy edited file I received 

from the press; subscribers, of course, can also read it in the press’s 

published form direct from the Duke UP site.  

Other than accidentals of formatting and pagination this text should not 

differ from the published one in any way. If there are discrepancies they 

are likely the result of final copy edits just before printing—I’d appreciate 

having them pointed out. These and other comments can be sent to 

mgk@umd.edu. This article is copyright © 2014 Duke University Press.] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

What Is “Digital Humanities,” and Why Are They Saying Such 

Terrible Things about It? 

Matthew Kirschenbaum 

University of Maryland 

I. 

In the midst of the 2009 MLA Convention, Chronicle of Higher Education 

blogger William Pannapacker wrote, “Amid all the doom and gloom [. . .] 

one field seems to be alive and well: the digital humanities.  More than that: 

Among all the contending subfields, the digital humanities seem like the first 

‘next big thing’ in a long time, because the implications of digital technology 

affect every field.”  Two years later Pannapacker titled his MLA Chronicle 

column with the seemingly unnecessary interrogative “Digital Humanities 

Triumphant?”    But would that more in life were so predictable as an 

academic dialectic: in 2013, Pannapacker’s by-now anticipated convention 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

2 

coverage centered on “The Dark Side of the Digital Humanities,” the special 

session event from which this journal issue is derived. 

I was not a participant on the panel, but I was in the crowded ballroom at the 

Boston Sheraton.  The mood beforehand was festive, not contentious.  

Everyone was expecting a good show from the A-list speakers assembled.  

From somewhere up front the strains of the Star Wars Imperial March, made 

tinny by a laptop speaker, were accompanied by scattered laughter.  

Nonetheless, the issues raised and the charges leveled were of the most 

serious order.  Richard Grusin, who had convened the session, built toward 

an arresting summation: “I would assert that it is no coincidence that the 

digital humanities has emerged as ‘the next big thing’ at the same moment 

that the neoliberalization and corporatization of higher education has 

intensified in the first decades of the twenty-first century.” 

This short essay is not intended as a defense of digital humanities, not least 

because I don’t think I disagree with Grusin, at least insofar as his 

articulation of the institutional environment that surrounds digital humanities 

is concerned.  (I work in a university too, I have eyes, I have ears.)  Yet next 

big thing or no, when it comes to digital humanities we are still only ever 

talking about someone’s or several someones’ work, the errors and 

limitations of which, whatever they may be in their particulars, should require 

no special forum or occasion for airing.  So let me say it at the outset: 

everything produced by digital humanities—and I do mean every thing, every 

written, scripted, coded, or fabricated thing—in whatever its guise or form, 

medium or format, may be subject to criticism and critique on the basis of its 

methods, assumptions, expressions, and outcomes.  All of that is completely 

normative and part of the routine conduct of academic disciplines. 

Yet in the last couple of years events that are not normative or routine have 

occurred, and it is those events that we are addressing with this special 

journal issue and that were addressed at the MLA special session.  These 

events, I would maintain, concern not the papers, projects, and other 

material pursuits of digital humanities—not the things of the digital 

humanities—but rather the advent of a construct of a “digital humanities.” 

Lest anyone think I am beginning with a semantic slip-slide, what I have just 

asserted is not only uncontroversial, it is also unoriginal, echoing as it does 

statements by the MLA session’s invited participants.  Wendy Chun, for 

example, insisted: “But let me be clear, my critique is not directed at DH per se.  DH 

projects have extended and renewed the humanities and revealed that the 

kinds of critical thinking (close textual analysis) that the humanities have 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

3 

always been engaged in is and has always been central to crafting technology 

and society” (emphasis in original).  By this account, then, DH “projects” 

have “extended and renewed” the humanities and have also helped 

historicize its activities in ways Chun finds salutary.  Rita Raley, meanwhile, 

commenting afterward on the response to the session (which unfolded in real 

time on Twitter), is even more direct, noting: “[T]hough our roundtable 

referred in passing to actually existing projects, collectives, and games that we 

take to be affirmative and inspiring, the ‘digital humanities’ under analysis 

was a discursive construction and, I should add, clearly noted as such 

throughout” (my emphasis).  Whatever else we are talking about in this 

special issue, then, whatever else the MLA session was addressing itself to, 

and whatever else I am engaging in my contribution here, it is not the 

material conduct of digital humanities or, if you prefer, “actually existing 

projects,” an especially clarifying phrase to keep in mind.  It is, instead, and 

still in Raley’s terms, a “discursive construction.” 

I have written about the existence of such a construct before, in two previous 

essays to which this, I suppose, contributes a third and final entry in an 

unanticipated trilogy.  The first and most widely circulated of these, “What Is 

Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in English Departments?” began as 

an assignment for a 2010 Association of Departments of English meeting 

(hence the specificity of its address).  I opened it by enjoining anyone truly 

interested in the first half of the titular question to Google it, or perhaps 

consult Wikipedia.  At the time I was merely acting out my impatience, since 

whatever else one could say about digital humanities, there had been no 

shortage of writing seeking to define it and so, as I put it then, “Whoever 

asks the question has not gone looking very hard for an answer.”  But my 

real point wasn’t that Google or Wikipedia were the de facto authorities, but 

rather that they offered convenient portals to layers of consensus that are 

shaped, over time, by a community of interested persons.  In other words, 

digital humanities was a construct, and the state of the construct could be more 

or less effectively monitored by checking in on its self-representations in 

aggregate.  (The remainder of the piece did some historical spadework, 

excavating the actual origin of the term digital humanities and explaining why I 

thought English departments had—again, historically—been especially 

hospitable to its emergence.)  But while the essay historicizes and 

characterizes DH, at no time does it actively define it; instead, in retrospect, 

here is what I see as its most clearly spoken moment: 

Digital humanities has also, I would propose, lately been galvanized by a group of 

younger (or not so young) graduate students, faculty members (both tenure line and 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

4 

contingent), and other academic professionals who now wield the label “digital 

humanities” instrumentally amid an increasingly monstrous institutional terrain 

defined by declining public support for higher education, rising tuitions, shrinking 

endowments, the proliferation of distance education and the for-profit university, 

and, underlying it all, the conversion of full-time, tenure-track academic labor to a 

part-time adjunct workforce. 

I don’t see this description of what I term a “monstrous” institutional terrain 

differing substantially from Grusin’s view of where we are in the academy 

today.  For several years thereafter, whenever asked to define digital 

humanities, my response was thus to say “a term of tactical convenience.”  

The contention that “DH” was usefully understood as a tactical term, then, 

became the subject of the second of these two essays, a contention necessary 

in order to, as I next wrote, “insist on the reality of circumstances in which it 

[‘digital humanities’] is unabashedly deployed to get things done—‘things’ 

that might include getting a faculty line or funding a staff position, 

establishing a curriculum, revamping a lab, or launching a center” (“Digital” 

415).  

That second piece does some further historical work, examining in detail one 

such tactical deployment of DH at one specific institution, and also, in a 

separate section, attempting to delineate how “DH,” as a signifier, was 

increasingly operationalized algorithmically on the network, actively 

mobilized via hashtags and metadata.  This essay has been criticized by Brian 

Lennon on the grounds that “tactical,” if read to follow de Certeau’s usage, 

invokes an outsider position that DH can no longer (or indeed, ever) claim 

the luxury of inhabiting; that DH is, rather, a strategic formation complicit 

with the state, or at the very least, complicit with the aims of conniving deans 

and administrators and foundation officers who are actively seeking to 

dismantle the bare, ruined choirs of the professoriate.  As I previously 

responded: “[F]or those of us who have [built] 

centers/programs/curricula/what-have-you one proposal, one hire, one 

lecture series, one grant, one server, one basement room at a time, the 

institutional interiority and strategic complicity of digital humanities seems 

perhaps equally unpersuasive” (Comment).  Be that as it may.  Why write a 

third piece on the topic? 

While questions about digital humanities did not originate with the 2013 

MLA, that moment does seem to me to mark the onset of an increasingly 

aggressive challenge that deserves recognition, and response.  Some elements 

of that challenge, like the MLA session or this journal issue, assume 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

5 

conventional shapes and forms that will be familiar to the uninitiated and 

easily processed.  Others, like blog entries (perhaps with comments 

appended), are also increasingly accepted as part of the space of our 

conversations, a grey literature that requires only a link passed in an email or 

on Facebook to access and assimilate.  Yet other maneuvers have unfolded in 

more hermetic environments, largely inaccessible to outsiders, defined 

especially by Twitter but more specifically by the interaction between Twitter 

and other online services (including Facebook and blogs), the result being a 

complex, always evolving ecology that rewards the 24/7 attention cycle.  This 

particular discourse network is characterized by subtle layers of indirection 

and innuendo (sometimes called “subtweets” for subliminal tweets, i.e., 

oblique commentaries in which particular individuals may or may not 

recognize themselves), a kind of social steganography (danah boyd’s term) 

whose stratifications render individual agendas transparent to the initiated 

and opaque to the neophyte.  While no one can be plugged in all the time, 

for a number of the contributors to this issue, these discussions form a 

normative part of their routines, an extension or facet of their critical 

engagement over the course of a day as the feed refreshes and the 

notifications chime.  (I pause for these details because online speech 

denaturalizes the register of the discourse here; and I lay emphasis on them 

to break down the dualism between the landscape of social media and 

traditional venues of professional record, like a Duke University Press 

journal.)  

If you follow the right Twitter accounts, then, if you read the right blogs, if 

you’re on the right lists, and if you’re included in the right backchannels . . . if 

you do these things, you’ll be within your rights to wonder (all over again) 

what digital humanities is anyway, and why on earth anyone would want it in 

their English (or any other) department.   

Herewith, then, are some of the terrible things of my title, hardly any of 

which are exaggerated for effect: Digital humanities is a nest of big data 

ideologues. Digital humanities digs MOOCs.  Digital humanities is an artifact 

of the post-9/11 security and surveillance state (the NSA of the MLA).  Like 

Johnny, digital humanities can’t  read.  Digital humanities doesn’t do theory.  

Digital humanities never historicizes.  Digital humanities is complicit.  Digital 

humanities is naive.  Digital humanities is hollow huckster boosterism.  

Digital humanities is managerial.    Digital humanities is the academic import 

of Silicon Valley solutionism (the term that is the shibboleth of bad-boy tech 

critic Evgeny Morozov).  Digital humanities cannot abide critique.  Digital 

humanities appeals to those in search of an oasis from the concerns of race, 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

6 

class, gender, and sexuality.  Digital humanities does not inhale (easily the 

best line of the bunch).  Digital humanities wears Google Glass.  Digital 

humanities wears thick, thick glasses (guilty).  Perhaps most damning of all: 

digital humanities is something separate from the rest of the humanities, 

and—this is the real secret—digital humanities wants it that way.1 

Terrible things indeed these are!  But while terrible can mean repugnant, the 

etymology of the word (Greek treëin, “to tremble”) also encompasses that 

which is terrific, by which we can mean possessed of great intensity (see also 

contemporary French usage).  It is not then so inappropriate to be saying 

“terrible” things about digital humanities at this particular moment, a 

moment when the institutions we inhabit are indeed at the epicenter of 

seismic shifts in attitude, means, and mission.  But we should be clear about 

exactly what it is we are addressing with these terrible allegations: we are 

(almost always) addressing and investing a construct, a construct that is 

variously journalistic (note the straight line from Grusin’s MLA comments to 

Pannapacker), administrative, algorithmic, and opportunistic (for which one 

might read, yes, tactical).  Collectively, and above all else, it is discursive, as 

Raley so astutely noted.  The very orthographic contours of “digital 

humanities” have been subject to unprecedented scrutiny: not long ago, 

William Germano, now Dean of Humanities and Social Sciences at Cooper-

Union, pronounced upon “[t]he spectacular rise of ‘DH’ as the most 

powerful digraph in the non-STEM academy.”  It is appropriate that 

Germano, editor-in-chief for twenty years at Columbia University Press prior 

to his Cooper-Union appointment, selects exactly the right term of art here.  

The digraph “DH”—variously also dh/DH/D_H/#dh as well as 

#transformdh and #dhpoco—is especially conspicuous on Twitter, where it 

functions not only as economical shorthand but also, as I have noted 

previously, as a hashtag—metadata—to be operationalized through search 

engines, aggregators, and notification services.  The orthographic (and very 

often orthogonal) tensions around digital humanities—is it the digital 

humanities or just digital humanities, is it capitalized or not capitalized—are 

further emblematic in this regard.  

The agon par excellence of the construct is of course the question of 

definition: what is digital humanities?  The insistence on the question is what 

allows the construct to do its work, to function as a space of contest for 

competing agendas.  But more importantly—and this is precisely where the 

logic of the construct most readily reveals itself—there is no actual shortage 

of definitions of digital humanities.  They are, by contrast, always latent and 

very often explicit in every curriculum and program proposal, every search 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

7 

committee charge and hiring brief, every grant application and book project 

that sees fit to invoke the term.  The definitions may not align, indeed they 

may at times prove inimical to one another.  But variegation is not the same 

as absence or ineffability, and so we may conclude that the continued 

insistence on definition is precisely what allows the construct to function as a 

self-evident given, perpetuating itself through brute repetition and the 

proliferation of localized, sometimes media-specific digraphic focalizers.  

You may recall that the Construct was also the name given to the self-

contained emulation of the Matrix in the Wachowskis’ films, the dojo where 

Neo spars with Morpheus to hone his Kung Fu technique.  The construct in 

this sense is overtly a place of ritualized (and dematerialized) contest.  This is 

not incidental to the sense in which I use it here, literalizing the meaning of 

the term beyond (I am sure) Raley’s intentions.  In the construct, the habitus 

of social media disrupts the traditional comity of academic exchange.  Just as 

Neo learns to bend—hack—the physics of his programmed reality, here one 

bends collegial niceties in competition for hits, retweets, likes, and replies, the 

very stuff—the Fu, in Internet parlance—of such odious reputation trackers 

as Klout.  Indeed, we know that when this journal issue is published its 

availability will be widely tweeted.  Brief excerpts from the essays (140 

characters, remember) will circulate on Twitter.  Blog posts characterizing or 

responding to the essays at greater length will appear; the essays themselves 

may be uploaded to personal sites or institutional repositories by their 

authors.  The authors and others will engage one another in the tweets and 

blog comments.  All of this will happen over a course of days, weeks, and 

months.  While the records of those responses will linger thereafter on the 

Web, they will be mute remainders, mere husks, of the frisson, the serotonin- 

and caffeine-fueled jags that propel real-time online exchange.  Only much 

more slowly will these essays pass into the collected professional literature, 

where they will be indexed, quoted, and referenced in the usual way.  This 

issue on the dark side of the digital humanities is itself an artifact (an issue) of 

the construct and will serve to sustain it, not least through (again) the cascade 

of agonistic reductionism that will inevitably characterize those engaging it 

through channels of metrical (that is, reputation-based) circulation on social 

media. 

Metrical, and often brutal.  Brutalism, or what some have dubbed the 

rhetoric of contempt, like ex cathedra pronouncement and aphorism, is a 

recognized online interactive mode, and the take-down is its consummate 

expression as genre and form.  Such is in fact the signature style of Evgeny 

Morozov, the caustic technology critic whose first book was titled The Net 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

8 

Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom (2011).  Morozov, as much as the 

dark sides of Star Wars or Pink Floyd, furnishes the referential framing for 

the current debate. He enters the scene as one of the most visible and 

vociferous critics of Silicon Valley, and indeed, “the Internet,” a 

macroconstruct whose artifice he emphasizes by insisting on its embrace with 

quotation marks.  The critique, honed on the whetstone of personal contact 

and up-close immersion in the day-to-day doings of the technoratti (see, for 

example, his 15,000 words on Tim O’Reilly in The Baffler), is aimed at 

technological essentialism and technological determinism, and above all 

idealism—what Morozov brands solutionism—which his second book, To Save 

Everything Click Here, effectively demolishes.  As a break-out public 

intellectual, Morozov is in his element online, cultivating an 

uncompromising, acerbic persona (his Twitter bio reads simply: “There are 

idiots.  Look around”).  The transposition to digital humanities by some of 

his followers was predictable: DHers are themselves solutionists, pretenders 

who arrive to fix the ills of the present-day academy with tools, apps, and the 

rhetorical equivalent of TED talks, all driven by a naive (and duplicitous) 

agenda that has its roots if not (yet) in an IPO then in the academic currency 

of jobs, funding, and tenure. But this is poor critique and worse history, 

suggesting, as it does, that the differences between venture capital and public 

institutions are, quite literally, immaterial. Digital humanities in the United 

States at least has its beginnings  not in California and not (for the most part) 

on the Ivy campuses, but instead in mostly eastern land-grant institutions.  

When a full documentary and archivally sound history of “digital humanities” 

is written, it will have to take into account the idiosyncrasies of this particular 

class of institution, and these will, I think, reveal a very different set of 

contexts than Silicon Valley’s orchards, lofts, and technology parks.  

Charges of brutalism and lack of civility are de facto subject to infinite 

regress, for the very charges become the object of brutal ridicule, and the 

cycle perpetuates.  But at some level it should be uncontroversial to observe 

that many of the terrible things uttered about “digital humanities” as a 

construct simply lack an elemental generosity, as if there were no critical (let 

alone ethical) distinctions obtainable between data mining a corpus of 

nineteenth-century fiction and data mining your telephone calling records, as 

if those who “do” DH haven’t been educated in the same critical traditions 

(indeed, sometimes in the same graduate programs) as their opponents, as if 

those who do DH aren’t also politically committed and politically engaged, 

and as if they don’t (as a result) typically find Morozov himself both amusing 

and smart and profoundly uncontroversial.  (And you will not convince me 

otherwise: here I unapologetically rely on my own stores of anecdote and 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

9 

personal interaction, on conversations and relationships that go back in some 

cases decades, to make these determinations.)  To indulge digital humanities 

only ever as a construct and a site of contest is also thus to give in to a world 

view that seems to me precisely neoliberal, precisely zero sum and 

agonistic—disembodied, desocialized, and evacuated of materiality or 

material history. 

II.  

I am finishing this essay in the weeks immediately following the conclusion 

of the Digital Humanities 2013 conference, held in Lincoln, Nebraska.  

DH13 was this year’s conference of record for the Alliance of Digital 

Humanities Organizations (ADHO), first formed in 2005 as an 

administrative entity shared by two scholarly associations, the predominantly 

North American Association for Computing and the Humanities and the 

predominantly European Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing, 

which have themselves been holding joint conferences since 1989 and 

individually since the early 1970s.  Today ADHO encompasses six 

constituent organizations, also including the Canadian Society for Digital 

Humanities / Société pour l'étude des médias interactifs (SDH-SEMI, now 

SDH/SCHN), the Australasian Association for Digital Humanities  (aaDH), 

centerNet: An International Network of Digital Humanities Centers, and the 

Japanese Association for Digital Humanities (JADH).  I mention these 

particulars to place two sets of facts before us: one, that digital humanities, 

even in its current configuration (what Steve Ramsay has dubbed “DH Type 

2”), has a history going back nearly a decade (and, as “humanities 

computing,” much longer than that), and two, that digital humanities has 

become thoroughly internationalized.  Indeed, an attendee at the 2013 

conference might have heard papers such as “Uncovering the ‘Hidden 

Histories’ of Computing in the Humanities 1949–1980: Findings and 

Reflections on the Pilot Project” or “Authorship Problem[s] of Japanese 

Early Modern Literatures in Seventeenth Century.”  Or else papers like “Are 

Google’s Linguistic Prosthesis Biased toward Commercially More Interesting 

Expressions? A Preliminary Study on the Linguistic Effects of 

Autocompletion Algorithms” or “The Digitized Divide: Mapping Access to 

Subscription-Based Digitized Resources” or “Against the Binary of Gender: 

A Case for Considering the Many Dimensions of Gender in DH Teaching 

and Research.”  

While the conference is heavily attended by humanities faculty and graduate 

students, it also includes significant representation from information studies, 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

10 

computer science, and library and archives professionals, as well as the so-

called alt-ac space.  Consequently, critical methods, assumptions, and 

discourse networks do not always align, even within the same panel; for every 

scrupulously written and carefully read paper citing Judith Butler or Bruno 

Latour, there were slide decks with data sets, graphs, and bullet points. If 

definition is the first great agon of the construct, inclusion and extent—

who’s in, who’s out—is the second.  The stakes are obvious: when a federal 

funding agency flies the flag of the digital humanities, one is incentivized to 

brand their work as digital humanities.  When an R1 does a cluster hire in 

digital humanities, one is incentivized to be on the market as a digital 

humanist.  When a digital humanities center has institutional resources, one is 

incentivized to seek to claim them by doing DH.  None of this is 

disingenuous or cynical, nor can anyone who has looked in detail at the 

history of academic disciplines think digital humanities is in any way 

exceptional with regard to dependencies between its intellectual currency and 

bottom-line ways and means. Yet we frequently ignore these institutionalized 

realities in favor of an appeal to the “digital humanities” construct, as though 

the construct (and not the institution) were the desired locus of our agency 

and efficacy.  In fact, digital humanists are recognized in the same way as 

individuals working in other fields: by doing work that is recognizable as 

digital humanities.  

My publishing in differences does not make me a scholar of feminist cultural 

studies; were I to wish to have myself considered as such, though, I would 

seek to publish in differences (and kindred venues), and I would develop my 

work within a network of citations recognizable to the already active 

participants who are publishing and speaking and teaching in that area with 

the goal of being listened to by them.  In time, if my contributions had merit, 

they might be taken up and cited by others and thus assimilated into an 

ongoing conversation.  So it is with digital humanities: you are a digital 

humanist if you are listened to by those who are already listened to as digital 

humanists, and they themselves got to be digital humanists by being listened 

to by others.  Jobs, grant funding, fellowships, publishing contracts, speaking 

invitations—these things do not make one a digital humanist, though they 

clearly have a material impact on the circumstances of the work one does to 

get listened to.  Put more plainly, if my university hires me as a digital 

humanist and if I receive a federal grant (say) to do such and such a thing 

that is described as digital humanities and if I am then rewarded by my 

department with promotion for having done it (not least because outside 

evaluators whom my department is enlisting to listen to as digital humanists 

have attested to its value to the digital humanities), then, well, yes, I am a 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

11 

digital humanist.  Can you be a digital humanist without doing those things?  

Yes, if you want to be, though you may find yourself being listened to less 

unless and until you do some thing that is sufficiently noteworthy that 

reasonable people who themselves do similar things must account for your 

work, your thing, as part of the progression of a shared field of interest.  That 

is what being a digital humanist is; it is almost all of what being a digital 

humanist is.  And while the material particulars of the work may vary in 

certain respects, including some very consequential respects, it is different 

not at all from being a Victorianist or a feminist cultural studies scholar or a 

scholar of Victorian feminist cultural studies. 

Digital humanists don’t want to extinguish reading and theory and 

interpretation and cultural criticism.  Digital humanists want to do their 

work.  They want jobs and (if the job includes the opportunity for it) they 

want tenure and promotion. They (often) want to teach.  They (often) want 

to publish.  They want to be heard.  They want professional recognition and 

stability, whether as contingent labor, ladder faculty, graduate students, or in 

“alt-ac” settings.  In short, they want pretty much the same things that every 

working academic wants, and the terrible truth is that they go about it in 

more or less familiar ways that include teaching, publishing, and 

administration.  Take, for example, Matthew Jockers, a collaborator and past 

colleague of Franco Moretti, he who gave us the term distant reading: now 

Jockers is on the English faculty at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln, an 

institution that has developed an exceptionally strong capacity in digital 

humanities (hence its hosting the recent conference).  If anybody is “in” DH, 

surely it is Jockers.  He has recently published a book titled Macroanalysis: 

Digital Methods and Literary History as part of the University of Illinois Press’s 

Topics in the Digital Humanities series.  In one early chapter, over the span 

of about a page, Jockers deploys a sequence of metaphors gleaned from strip 

mining to articulate his work’s relation to the literary history of his subtitle:  

 [W]hat is needed now is the equivalent of open-pit mining or hydraulicking. [. . 

.] Close reading, traditional searching, will continue to reveal nuggets, while the 

deeper veins lie buried beneath the mass of gravel layered above.  What are 

required are the methods for aggregating and making sense out of both the nuggets 

and the tailings [. . .] [to] exploit the trammel of computation to process, 

condense, deform, and analyze the deeper strata from which these nuggets were 

born, to unearth, for the first time, what these corpora really contain.  (9–10) 

I am quoting selectively, and elsewhere Jockers develops his argument along 

paths more subtle, perhaps more comfortable, than mountaintop removal.  



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

12 

But that’s secondary to my point, which is that to receive even such passages 

as these with the agonistic zero-sum view that the author seeks to somehow 

eradicate traditional close reading and interpretation makes sense only in the 

construct.  

The facts, after all, are these: Jockers’s book was published in late 2012 with a 

print run of such and such.  It will be bought by university libraries and some 

number of individuals.  Some fewer number of those who bought it will read 

it.  It will be reviewed in some number of venues, though the reviews will fall 

off after the first few years as they always do.  Eventually (we do not know 

when) it will go out of print.  It will be cited, by how many we do not yet 

know.  It will be assigned, to how many classes we do not yet know.  It will 

inspire some number of students, some fraction of whom may perhaps go to 

Nebraska, to work with Jockers.   

At some point the approaches in the book may pass out of fashion, and it 

may thus appear dated or naive.  At some point the approaches may become 

more widespread, in which case the book will appear prescient and wise.  

Regardless, the book will do what almost all serious books do, albeit to 

greater or lesser extents: contribute to a conversation.  Right now there is an 

especially lively such conversation around how we read.  My colleague Lee 

Konstantinou has been collecting the different modalities; besides close and 

distant, his list includes also uncritical reading (Michael Warner), reparative 

reading (Eve Sedgwick), generous reading (Timothy Bewes), disintegrated 

reading (Rita Raley), surface reading (Sharon Best and Stephen Marcus; also 

Heather Love), and the hermeneutics of situation (Chris Nealon and Jeffrey 

Nealon).  Jockers’s interventions in Macroanalysis have precisely no chance of 

displacing or discouraging any of these other modes of reading even if such 

were his intent, which it manifestly is not.  Jockers does not wish for us all to 

become text miners and for none of us to read symptomatically or 

generously or reparatively; he likely wishes for more of us to mine texts (surely 

that is a motive in writing the book), and then talk to those who read 

reparatively and generously and closely (surely that is the motive in doing the 

mining). None of this differs in any substantial way from the publication of a 

special journal issue collecting papers from a group of scholars around an 

intervention such as “surface reading,” for example.   

Let me offer an example from another quarter.  Peter Robinson, who has 

had a long and distinguished career as an editorial theorist and textual 

scholar, has lately been giving papers in which he purports to explain “[w]hy 

digital humanists should get out of textual scholarship.  And if they don't, 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

13 

why we textual scholars should throw them out.”  Robinson’s argument is 

predicated on the belief that digital humanists build tools and that textual 

studies now more or less has all the tools it needs to go about its work, which 

is that of making critical editions (electronic or otherwise).  He ends with 

this: “We may use digital humanities to be better textual scholars, but we do 

not pretend to be digital humanists.  In return, digital humanists might also 

declare: we do digital humanities, and we try to help textual scholars to be 

better textual scholars through digital humanities, but we do not pretend to 

be textual scholars.”  There are many ways in which one might seek to 

answer Robinson, starting with the assumption that digital humanities is 

confined to the activity of tool building.  But we can also say this: Robinson’s 

concluding statement is a catechism that makes sense only in the construct, 

that virtual discursive space where Morpheus and Neo (who are both really 

on the same side, remember) can battle without regard for bodies, history, or 

physics.  Outside of the construct, Robinson’s statement has no sense, 

indeed, no context.  It speaks to no body.  Why?  Because it presumes the 

existence of entities called digital humanities (or for that matter textual 

scholarship) that exist apart from the practices of the people who identify with 

them.  (To be sure, there are exemplars of digital humanists who have no 

great interest in textual scholarship just as there are textual scholars who have 

no investments in the digital humanities—but these individual cases merely 

reflect the reality of individual choices and careers, not the fractal coastlines 

of some metadisciplinary geography exposed at low tide.)  

Robinson is thus making a purely discursive move in a purely discursive 

space.  Put more plainly, it is not as if one could sit in the audience and hear 

his talk and say, “Yes, Robinson has this right, and so I will return to my 

campus and dissociate digital humanities from textual scholarship forthwith.”  

Indeed, Robinson himself clearly knows this, since the most tangible action 

items in his paper refer to the material circumstances of scholarly production: 

copyrights, costs, the quality of markup and metadata, and the 

interoperability of tools.    In any case, Robinson’s positions would have 

been unimaginable just a few years ago, before the first large-scale 

deployments of the “digital humanities” construct.  Not because there are no 

intellectual distinctions to be drawn between what digital humanities does 

and what textual scholarship does, but rather because the number of actual 

people—outside the construct—who would wish to concern themselves with 

the things Robinson concerns himself with who do not also have a history 

and identity in the “digital humanities” is nowadays vanishingly small.  



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

14 

I have written as I have to suggest neither that all dark side critiques are 

disingenuous nor that any questioning of “digital humanities” is universally 

reducible to a construct.  Of course one should ask questions about any set 

of disciplinary practices that have been as visible and prodigious as digital 

humanities in recent years.  And the construct serves its purpose too; 

reductionism is often nothing more (and nothing less) than a concession to 

the limitations of the human capacity for attention. Indeed, the formation of 

discursive constructs around areas of critical engagement is itself entirely 

normative (see, for example, “New Historicism” or “Romanticism”); Brian 

McHale once chose exactly that phrase—discursive construct—to 

characterize “postmodernism” (4-5). Thus it is also not surprising that 

“DHers” themselves have written innumerable statements which contribute 

to the construct’s formation and perpetuation.  But it is also necessary and 

appropriate to draw attention to what seems to me to be a recent and 

particular and peculiarly conspicuous set of moves, those suggested by the 

serial repetition of qualifying language seeking to establish discursive distance 

between critiques of “digital humanities” as such and those addressed to 

individual projects and productions.  Drawing attention to that move (I have 

sought to do this typographically through my own use of quotation marks 

around “digital humanities,” much as Morozov insists on “the Internet”) 

ought to remind us of the limits of critique when critique is exercised 

according to recognizable and repeatable (and procedural) stances.   So-called 

“dark side” critiques could therefore productively probe the “digital 

humanities” construct in relation to what we know of prior academic 

discursive formations, an inquiry remarkably absent from those critiques to 

date despite their own charges that “digital humanities” is not sufficiently 

invested in its histories. Moreover, critiques of “digital humanities” can 

ameliorate the construct (as opposed to indulging its brutal and metric 

perpetuation) by acknowledging—historically, materially—that “digital 

humanities” is in fact a diversified set of practices, one whose details and 

methodologies responsible critique has a responsibility to understand and 

engage. 

Such I would dearly like to see, for it is needed not just by “digital 

humanities” but by the constituencies of the humanities. Recent revelations 

notwithstanding, we cannot proceed as though such suddenly public 

phenomena as “metadata” or “data mining” are simply the calling cards of 

the state. I know of at least one exemplar already at hand.  I am thinking of 

Alan Liu’s essay “The Meaning of the Digital Humanities” in the March 2013 

issue of PMLA.  Given the title, one could be forgiven for expecting the 

usual bout with definitions and measures of inclusion.  But the essay offers 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

15 

little in that regard.  It makes a remarkably novel move instead: a close 

reading (if you will) of one particular digital humanities project, specifically, a 

paper published out of Stanford University’s Literary Lab based on 

experiments with computational analysis of a data corpus.  In focusing his 

address on the research reported in this one paper, Liu hews very close to the 

science and technology studies (STS) approach that I believe offers the best 

basis for relevant critique of and in the digital humanities, a critique focused 

around the illumination of the antecedents, assumptions, and material 

dependencies of particular tools, methods, parentages of mentoring, and 

institutional settings.  Digital humanities, after all, is sometimes said to suffer 

from physics envy.  Let us, then, take that as it may be and avail ourselves of 

a singularly powerful intellectual precedent for examining in close (yes, 

microscopic) detail the material conditions of knowledge production in 

scientific settings or configurations.  Let us read citation networks and 

publication venues.  Let us examine the usage patterns around particular 

tools.  Let us treat the recensio of data sets. 

Liu gives us a more-than-passing glimpse of what all this may look like: he 

undertakes to correspond, for example, with the managing editor of the 

Historical Thesaurus of the Oxford English Dictionary (HTOED), a reference 

whose data furnishes the main ingredient in what Liu terms an essential 

“adjustment step” in the authors’ methodology.  Liu, a master reader, rightly 

recognizes this as the crux of the narrative he is unspooling, and so he 

follows the thread to the source in order to expose the implications of the 

dependencies to the HTOED.  Liu further notes that the HTOED, though 

historically “precomputational,” is not “pretechnological” and has in fact 

been implemented and transposed through a series of online databases since 

its origins in the 1960s; it thus (now) manifests a rich range of media 

archaeological layers.  The essay succeeds not only because it offers up a 

critique with which we may better see the contributions and limits of a 

particular project but also because it is actively interested in—I would go so 

far as to say fascinated by—digital humanities.  Liu, in short, seeks to give us 

the digital humanities in action, and so he sites critique amid the evidentiary 

details of data sets and databases and algorithms, as well literary historical 

interpretation and disciplinary knowledge.2  

In previous essays, I’ve described digital humanities as both a 

“methodological outlook” (“What is”) and as a “tactical term” (“DH As/is”).  

In closing, I will be as plain as I can be: we will never know what digital 

humanities “is” because we don’t want to know nor is it useful for us to 

know.  John Unsworth, who may well have written the foundational naming 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

16 

document for digital humanities (given as a talk on May 25, 2001), introduced 

digital humanities as a “concession” arrived at for want of other, different 

terms.  From that very day, we were already in the construct, a concession that 

exists to consolidate and propagate vectors of ambiguity, affirmation, and 

dissent.3  Regardless, there is one thing that digital humanities ineluctably is: 

digital humanities is work, somebody’s work, somewhere, some thing, always.  

We know how to talk about work.  So let’s talk about this work, in action, 

this actually existing work.4 

Notes 

1 This paragraph consolidates and paraphrases (but exaggerates hardly at all) a number of 

ongoing discourses around digital humanities, principally online.  Those wishing to 

reconstruct the particular sources that inspired me (which are by no means coextensive with 

the totality of the “dark side” critique) are advised to consult the following.  For digital 

humanities as big data ideology (and antitheoretical/historical/hermeneutical/critical), see 

the 2012–13 Twitter feeds of David Golumbia and Brian Lennon.  See also the various 

entries in the “digital humanities” category on Golumbia’s Uncomputing blog.   For digital 

humanities and MOOCs, see (if only as a starting point) Grusin.  For digital humanities and 

the post-9/11 surveillance state, see (esp.) Lennon on Twitter.  For digital humanities as 

managerial see Allington.  For Morozov worship, see (again) Golumbia and Lennon 

(Twitter).  “Digital humanities never once inhaled” is from Alan Liu’s trenchant essay, 

“Where Is Cultural Criticism in the Digital Humanities?”  For an extensive discussion 

around race, class, gender, sexuality, and disability—and the extent to which DH is or is not 

a refuge from them all—see Smith and Koh and Risam, including comments.  Though this 

accounting is not exhaustive, a reader who spends any length of time with these sources 

(including also comments, replies, and the other dialogic features of online expression) will, I 

think, see voiced most if not all of the “terrible things” I seek here to address. 

2 Fred Gibbs, reacting to an earlier essay of Liu’s, has also delineated the need for such a 

situated critique. He asserts, “digital humanities criticism needs to go beyond typical peer 

review and inhabit a genre of its own-—a critical discourse, a kind of scholarship in its own 

right.” 

3 That mere definitions of digital humanities are commonplace and easy to come by—

Ashgate has now devoted a reader to collecting them—only accentuates the point. See 

Terras, Nyhan, and Vanhouette. 

4 A number of wise friends commented on an initial draft of this essay. I am grateful to 

them. 

Works Cited 

Allington, Daniel.  “The Managerial Humanities; or, Why the Digital Humanities Don’t 

Exist.”  Weblog entry.  Daniel Allington.  31 Mar. 2013.  

http://www.danielallington.net/2013/03/the-managerial-humanities-or-why-the-digital-

humanities-dont-exist/. 



Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

17 

Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong.  “The Dark Side of Digital Humanities--Part 1.”  Center for 21st 

Century Studies.  9 Jan. 2013.  http://www.c21uwm.com/2013/01/09/the-dark-side-of-the-

digital-humanities-part-1/. 

Germano, William (WmGermano).  “The spectacular rise of ‘DH’ as the most powerful 

digraph in the non-STEM academy.”  19 Jan. 2013, 9:35 a. m.  Tweet. 

Gibbs, Fred. “Critical Discourse in Digital Humanities.” Journal of Digital Humanities 1.1 

(2011): http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-1/critical-discourse-in-digital-humanities-by-

fred-gibbs/ (accessed 10 October 2013). 

Gold, Matthew, ed.  Debates in the Digital Humanities.  Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 

2011. 

Golumbia, David.  Uncomputing.  Weblog.  http://www.uncomputing.org/?cat=235 

(accessed 1 October 2013). 

---- (@dgolumbia).  Twitter. 

Grusin, Richard.  “The Dark Side of Digital Humanities--Part 2.”  Center for 21st Century 

Studies 9 Jan. 2013.  http://www.c21uwm.com/2013/01/09/the-dark-side-of-the-digital-

humanities-part-2/. 

Jockers, Matthew L.  Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History.  Urbana: U of 

Illinois P, 2013. 

Kirschenbaum, Matthew.  Comment on “Digital Humanities: Two Definitions.”  

Uncomputing.  21 Jan. 2013.  http://www.uncomputing.org/?p=203&cpage=1#comment-

2135. 

----.  “Digital Humanities as/Is a Tactical Term.”  Gold 415–28. 

----.  “What Is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in English Departments?” ADE 

Bulletin 150 (2010).  http://mkirschenbaum.files.wordpress.com/2011/03/ade-final.pdf 

(accessed Aug. 5, 2013. 

Koh, Adeline, and Roopika Risam.  “Open Thread: The Digital Humanities as a Historical 

‘Refuge” from Race/Class/Gender/Sexuality/Disability?”  Weblog entry.  Postcolonial 

Digital Humanities.  10 May 2013.  http://dhpoco.org/blog/2013/05/10/open-thread-the-

digital-humanities-as-a-historical-refuge-from-raceclassgendersexualitydisability/. 

Konstantinou, Lee. Personal communication. 20 Jul. 2013, 8:46 p. m. 

Lennon, Brian.  Comment on “Digital Humanities: Two Definitions.”  Uncomputing.  21 

Jan. 2013.  http://www.uncomputing.org/?p=203&cpage=1#comment-2129. 

---- (@cesgnal).  Twitter.   

Liu, Alan.  “The Meaning of the Digital Humanities.” PMLA 128.2 (March 2013): 409–23. 

http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-1/critical-discourse-in-digital-humanities-by-fred-gibbs/
http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-1/critical-discourse-in-digital-humanities-by-fred-gibbs/


Kirschenbaum, “What is ‘Digital Humanities,’ and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible 

Things about It?” differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63. Copyright © 2014 Duke University Press. 

 

18 

----.  “Where Is Cultural Criticism in the Digital Humanities?” Gold, 2011. 

McHale, Brian. Postmodernist Fiction. New York and London: Routledge, 1987. 

Morozov, Evgeny.  The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom.  New York: 

PublicAffairs, 2011. 

Pannapacker, William.  “The MLA and the Digital Humanities.”  Chronicle of Higher 

Education 28 Dec. 2009.  http://chronicle.com/blogPost/The-MLAthe-Digital/19468/. 

Raley, Rita.  “The Dark Side of Digital Humanities--Part 4.” Center for 21st Century Studies.  

9 Jan. 2013.  http://www.c21uwm.com/2013/01/09/the-dark-side-of-the-digital-

humanities-part-4/. 

Ramsay, Stephen.  “DH Types One and Two.”  Weblog entry.  Stephen Ramsay.  5 May 

2013. 

Robinson, Peter.  “Why Digital Humanists Should Get Out of Textual Scholarship. And If 

They Don't, Why We Textual Scholars Should Throw Them Out.”  Scholarly Digital 

Editions 29 Jul. 2013.  http://scholarlydigitaleditions.blogspot.com/2013/07/why-digital-

humanists-should-get-out-of.html. 

Smith, Martha Nell.  “The Human Touch Software of the Highest Order: Revisiting Editing 

as Interpretation.”  Textual Cultures: Texts, Contexts, Interpretation 2.1: 2007: 1–15. 

Terras, Melissa, Julianne Nyhan, and Edward Vanhoutte, eds.  Defining Digital Humanities: 

A Reader.  Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate, 2013. 

Unsworth, John.  “A Master’s Degree in Digital Humanities: Part of the Media Studies 

Program at the University of Virginia.”  2001 Congress of the Social Sciences and 

Humanities.  Université Laval, Québec, Canada.  Lecture.  25 May 2001.  

http://people.lis.illinois.edu/~unsworth/laval.html. 


