[image: DHQ Logo]
[image: Digital Humanities Quarterly Logo]

homesubmissionsabout dhqdhq peoplecontact
 




Current Issue
	2017: 11.3

Preview Issue
	2017: 11.4

Previous Issues
	2017: 11.2
	2017: 11.1
	2016: 10.4
	2016: 10.3
	2016: 10.2
	2016: 10.1
	2015: 9.4
	2015: 9.3
	2015: 9.2
	2015: 9.1
	2014: 8.4
	2014: 8.3
	2014: 8.2
	2014: 8.1
	2013: 7.3
	2013: 7.2
	2013: 7.1
	2012: 6.3
	2012: 6.2
	2012: 6.1
	2011: 5.3
	2011: 5.2
	2011: 5.1
	2010: 4.2
	2010: 4.1
	2009: 3.4
	2009: 3.3
	2009: 3.2
	2009: 3.1
	2008: 2.1
	2007: 1.2
	2007: 1.1

Indexes
	 Title
	 Author


[image: sidenavbarimg]ISSN 1938-4122

Announcements
	Call for Reviewers
	Call for Submissions


[image: button1-addthis.gif]

DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly
2017
Volume 11 Number 3
2017 11.3
                     | 
                    XML

| 
		   Discuss
			(
				Comments
			)
                



    
        
            
                
                Teaching Electronic Literature as Digital Humanities: A
                    Proposal

                Alex Saum-Pascual <saum-pascual_at_berkeley_dot_edu>, University of California, Berkeley

            
            

            
        
        
        
        
     

    
        
            Abstract

                
                 This essay presents an approach to teaching Digital Humanities through two
                    largely unexplored lenses: electronic literature and foreign languages (Spanish
                    in particular). It offers a practical example of a course taught during the
                    Spring of 2016 at UC Berkeley that combines literary analysis with the teaching
                    of basic programming skills, and DH tools and methods. Concretely, this course
                    is an upper division, undergraduate writing intensive class, where students
                    learn how to write and talk about electronic literature–e.g. hypertext novels,
                    kinetic poetry, automatic generators, social media fictions, etc.–, learning
                    specific terminology and theoretical frameworks, as they gain the skills to
                    build their own digital art pieces in a collaborative workshop setting. By
                    taking this course as a practical example, this essay tackles three important
                    pillars in the humanities. Firstly, the overall concept of literature, and more
                    specifically, the literary; secondly, what we understand by literary studies at
                    the university; and thirdly, and more broadly, what constitutes cultural (beyond
                    technical) literacy in the twenty–first century. This essay’s final claim is
                    that teaching e-it as DH effectively address all three.

            

            
        
        
            1
Digital Humanities is not a new field in U.S. universities. Spread across different
                disciplines, it has also been commonly hosted in English departments. Perhaps due to
                the long association between computers and composition, most DH practices are
                founded on the belief that “after numerical input, text is the most traceable type of
                        data for computers to manipulate”
                     [Kirschenbaum 2011]. Going beyond the instrumentality of data analysis, in this essay I want to
                propose an approach to teaching Digital Humanities in its relation to literary
                studies through two largely unexplored lenses: electronic literature and foreign
                languages (Spanish in particular, although this methodology can be applied to other
                languages). This pedagogical proposal is based on the belief that the range of
                cultural literacies that are involved in digital reading and writing
                competencies—plus the added value of learning how to work collaboratively in a
                community of practice—are better served in a foreign language environment than in a
                purely English literature department. I present a practical example of a course I
                have developed and taught during the Spring of 2016 at UC Berkeley that combines
                literary analysis with the teaching of basic programming skills, and DH tools and
                methods. Cross–listed between the Spanish and Portuguese Department and the Berkeley
                Center for New Media, this is an upper division, undergraduate writing intensive
                class, where students learn how to write and talk about electronic literature—e.g.
                hypertext novels, kinetic poetry, automatic generators, social media fictions,
                etc.—, learning specific terminology and theoretical frameworks, as they gain the
                skills to build their own digital art pieces in a collaborative workshop setting.
                    “Electronic Literature: A Critical Making & Writing
                    Course” is a semester long course that incorporates academic research
                tools and resources, together with practical, hands-on work. 

            
                Electronic Literature as Digital Humanities

                2
Before going into the specifics of this course—in order to delimit the many ways
                    there are to talk about digital prose and poetry—in this essay I follow the
                    definition provided by the Electronic Literature Organization by which
                        electronic literature (e-lit) “refers to works with important literary aspects that
                            take advantage of the capabilities and contexts provided by the
                            stand–alone or networked computer”
                         [Electronic Literature Organization n.d.].[1] Works of fiction such as a hypertextual or
                    an interactive novel, or a multimedia piece of poetry that requires the
                    scrolling, clicking and decision making of the user in order to be read, would
                    be paradigmatic examples of this peculiar type of DH literature. 

                3
These types of electronic works, which are also commonly known as
                        born–digital literature, essentially describe literary texts
                    that were conceived in a computer to be performed on a computer, and that would
                    lose a lot of their expressive signification when printed—being thus works of
                    literature (a classic discipline in the humanities) as well as digital media
                    objects. Moreover, since these texts demand the active participation of the
                    reader in “non–trivial” ways, reading becomes a
                    full body experience that requires different competencies from those involved in
                    reading traditional print.[2]
                

                4
Likewise, the reading and writing of digital works, mostly distributed
                    online—together with the work of a community of collaborative e-lit
                    producers—has challenged established literary concepts such as
                        “author,”
                    “authorship,”
                    “work,” and even the act of reading itself, now fluctuating
                    between distances and depths of reading.[3] There is an increasing number of publications engaging in the
                    redefinition of these key topics, assuming that we are indeed experiencing a
                    digital turn in literary practice, and we have started to emphasize the use of
                    digital tools to be applied to literary texts, as seen by the affirmation of
                    hosting DH courses in English departments. This is undeniable, but while we have
                    developed and made some progress on the application of digital
                    tools to literary texts—inevitably treating the latter as informational and
                    quantifiable data—, we seem to have been less interested in determining what
                    sort of competencies are necessary, not to read digital texts
                        as data, but to explore the literary values of
                    those texts that were born digital in the first place. 

                5
In Electronic Literature: New Horizons for the
                        Literary, N. Katherine Hayles began to explore the opportunities
                    that the teaching of born digital literature had for other fields such as
                    computation. Although she was addressing the Computer Science community rather
                    than the DH one directly, she explained that just as networked and programmable
                    digital media were transforming literature, so were literary effects
                    reevaluating computational practice by reveling in the recursive feedback loops
                    involved in the embodied practice, the tacit knowledge and the explicit
                    articulation that happened in both spheres. She acknowledged, nevertheless, that
                    traditional print literature had also created similar recursive loops, but e-lit
                    also performed “the additional function of entwining human ways of
                            knowing with machine cognitions”
                         [Hayles 2008]. By exploring the tension between the high-level meanings of human
                    discourse and the cascading processes linked with executable code in machines we
                    realize how ideas, when performed by digital media, “become more than disembodied concepts, emotions signify
                            as more than irrational fleeting sensations, coded algorithms connect
                            with human intuitions, and machine cognitions promiscuously mingle with
                            conscious and embodied knowledges”
                         [Hayles 2008]. By the same token, computation becomes a powerful way “to reveal to us the implications of our contemporary
                            situation, creating revelations that work within and beneath conscious
                            thought”
                         [Hayles 2008]. Computation ceases to be a technical practice only to become a method of
                    exploring the dynamics of our contemporary digital situation, and our ways of
                    creating art within it. Thus, the lessons that are being taught when engaging
                    with the teaching of born-digital works concern directly the computer science
                    field, but should also interest us as (digital) humanists. 

                6
I will elaborate on my concept of e-lit and born digital works throughout the
                    essay, but it is important to stress at this point that the e-lit course that I
                    am proposing as a means of teaching Digital Humanities, while evidently
                    respecting these definitions and concerns, is built on two further controversial
                    assumptions. On the one hand, the belief that e-lit is a field, not only of
                    creative practice, but also worthy of pedagogical infrastructure within the
                    University, and on the other, the assertion that there is a
                        community of individuals interested in its pedagogical
                    development—albeit in many different roles. 

                7
Describing this e-lit community is, however, even more complicated than defining
                    its object and its relation to DH, and for the purposes of this essay I will
                    refer broadly to all those individuals whose (artistic or academic) practice
                    revolves around e-lit in one way or another, but who essentially understand that
                    the intersection of digital technologies and writing has revolutionized our
                    comprehension of three established pillars in the humanities. Firstly, the
                    overall concept of literature, and more specifically, the literary;
                    secondly, what we understand by literary studies at the university;
                    and thirdly, and more broadly, what constitutes cultural (beyond technical)
                        literacies in the twenty-first century. I will begin my
                    argumentation by describing the second and third points before concluding with
                    the importance of treating the digital literary under a media
                    specific framework for the benefit of our humanistic inquiries around
                    literature, but essentially, teaching e-lit as DH—and in a foreign
                    language environment—effectively addresses all three. 

            

            
                Teaching E-Lit as Digital Humanities at UC Berkeley

                8
Although the Digital Humanities are not new in our universities, and for the past
                    decades professors at Berkeley have carried out important research advancing the
                    field, up until the past couple of years these practices had remained isolated
                    within each professor’s individual agenda, not being attached to a comprehensive
                    academic DH curriculum. Thanks to a grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation,
                    with additional support from the Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research, in
                    2014 Digital Humanities at Berkeley was born in
                    partnership between the Office of the Dean of Arts and Humanities and Research
                    IT in the Office of the CIO. DH at Berkeley serves as a locus to streamline DH
                    practices on campus, and in support of “the thoughtful application of digital tools and
                            methodologies to humanistic inquiry by offering project consulting,
                            summer workshops, grants for collaborative research and new courses, and
                            other activities at UC Berkeley”
                         [Digital Humanities at Berkeley n.d.]. Up until now, DH at Berkeley has funded the development of 18 new
                    courses combining digital approaches to disciplines as varied as Political
                    Science and Theater, Dance and Performance Studies.[4] One of these new courses, “Electronic Literature: A Critical Making and Writing Course,” is a
                    Spanish language writing intensive workshop on e-lit that encourages the
                    practice of DH tools and methods (hands-on digital hacking) in hopes of
                    developing new theories of the digital literary, as well as exploring how e-lit
                    can help us reevaluate computational practices.[5]

                9
Likewise, seeking to implement a coherent methodology of teaching, “Electronic Literature: A Critical Making and Writing
                        Course” is structured according to a hermeneutics particular to
                    Digital Humanities. Similar to what Diane Jackaki and Katie Faull suggested in
                    their presentation at the DH15 conference, “Pedagogical
                        Hermeneutics and Teaching DH in a Liberal Arts Context”
                    [Jackaki and Faull 2015], this e-lit course is built around a DH pedagogy
                    based on practice, discovery, and, most importantly in my case, community.
                    Setting practice at the heart of pedagogical hermeneutics implies, in turn, that
                    this DH course should emphasize experimentation and discovery (of digital tools
                    and computational principles), but also, in the case of e-lit, their emerging
                    poetic relations. To this end, we need to analyze poetic or narrative objects,
                    and at the same time pay close attention to the material and technical
                    conditions that make them possible: How does their underlying code work? Was the
                    poem built on a particular program? Does it require proprietary software to be
                    read? Can a hypertext novel be read by any operating system? etc. Although we
                    all know of the importance of print in literary history, thinking about the
                    materials behind a poem or story is not something we tend to highlight when
                    teaching language or literature. Conversely, material affordances and media
                    constraints come quickly to the fore when working with digital poetry and its
                    flickering, glitchy, or obsolete qualities, for instance—and not only when it
                    stops working.

                10
“Electronic Literature: A Critical Making and Writing
                        Course,” thus seeks to explore the previously mentioned issues and
                    methods. It is divided in two correlating modules as indicated by its title:
                    critical writing and critical making. The first module deals mainly with
                    improving students’ foreign language writing skills and critical analysis of
                    aspects particular to electronic literature: changes in authorship models
                    (cyborg authorship and posthumanism, for example), questions of originality
                    (unoriginal genius, remix, etc.), challenges in textual ontology (code ontology
                    vs. print ontology), variations in narrative structures (hypertext vs. linear
                    narrative) among many others. Exploring original e-lit works that enact these
                    theoretical concepts helps students materialize their understanding. For
                    instance, by reading the Spanish-language blog-fiction Más respeto que soy tu madre,
                    we are able to experience how the supposed blog author, a middle aged
                    Argentinean housewife writing about her hardships during the country’s financial
                    crisis, is really nothing but a parodied avatar created by the popular writer
                    Hernán Casciari; while by reading Loss Pequeño Glazier’s hypermedia narrative,
                        Territorio
                        Libre, we experience the narrator’s fragmented travels
                    through Cuba as we sense how the island’s digital culture depends on local
                    histories and individual experiences as much as it is shaped (and similarly
                    fragmented) by the availability of material infrastructures, commerce and the
                    State.

                11
Further, by being cross-listed between the Berkeley Center for New Media and the
                    Department of Spanish and Portuguese, the course improves students’ reading and
                    writing skills in Spanish through the reading and writing of critical essays
                    both in English and Spanish. [6] To accompany the experiencing of Casciari’s
                    fiction, students are encouraged to read critical works such as Daniel
                    Escandell’s essays (in Spanish) on avatars and blogs, for instance, and to
                    complement the experiences on the hypertextual structures of Territorio libre
                    students are presented with Borges’s short story The Garden
                        of Forking Paths (either in English or Spanish) as well as Espen
                    Aarseth’s seminal Cybertext. Perspectives on Ergodic
                        Literature (in English). Finally, and to continue with this example,
                    students would be asked to reflect on their readings by writing a short critical
                    commentary on how fragmentation could be used for creative writing by analyzing
                    some exceptional uses of social media platforms (as in Casciari’s work) or
                    writing software (as in Pequeño Glazier’s custom-made platform) that go beyond
                    their creator’s purpose. Students would be encouraged to find a work of e-lit
                    that exploits these characteristics, describe what they see, and evaluate how
                    successful the work is in taking advantage of the technical affordances of the
                    medium. As can be seen, these types of written assignments are aimed at
                    exercising students’ presentational and analytical skills, as well as reflecting
                    on the importance of reading in mediating our digital experience. 

                12
The writing of e-lit, however, is an interdisciplinary endeavor, and different
                    genres require different skills. Hence the second module of the course
                    incorporates the learning of DH tools and methods related to some important
                    e-lit genres: Kinetic Poetry, Permutators and Generators, Hypertext Narratives,
                    Geo-Location Literature, Augmented Reality Texts, and Social Media Fictions. All
                    students are introduced to each genre’s main functionalities, languages, and
                    their poetic and artistic applications and history, but they only specialize in
                    building one particular piece for their final projects. Nevertheless, thanks to
                    weekly workshops, students would have been building prototypes of different
                    e-lit pieces, such as hypertextual narratives built on Twine, kinetic GIF works,
                    remixed poems built around existing generators like Nick Montfort’s famous
                        Taroko Gorge, and spatial narratives built on
                    mapping and timeline software such as Findery or StoryMaps. Further, by
                    workshopping their own digital pieces, students gain scholarly insights only
                    obtained by participating in this type of practice-based, community exercise of
                    learning competencies. As students engage with these different tools and
                    platforms, they collectively share their work-in-progress in both a shared class
                    website and their own personal blogging spaces, shaping their own e-lit
                    community of practice, as well as intersecting the global net-based
                        network.[7]
                

                13
The complete syllabus, list of class exercises, and final projects can be
                    accessed permanently through the bilingual course site [http://eliterature.digitalhumanities.berkeley.edu/] but a
                    paradigmatic sample of students’ final projects includes: a hypermedia narrative
                    built with the open source tool Twine about the fragmented and violent
                    experience of Mexican students crossing the U.S. border (Zelina Gaytan’s Dos Patrias); a
                    couple of geospatial narratives built on the ArcGIS StoryMaps platform that
                    recount stories of sexual harassment and assault of women around the world
                    (Alessa Guerrero’s Ch-Chh, oye nena,
                            a dónde vas?) or about the impact of climate change in
                    different parts of the globe (Michelaina Johnson’s Hasta el último hueso); an interactive
                    fiction built on the design system Inform7 recreating the restrictive,
                    claustrophobic (and intentionally boring) world of office work to explore the
                    restrictions imposed on literary creativity in Spanish when using a programing
                    language originally based on natural (English) language (Kevin Chen’s Tu oficina); a
                    custom-made reading program that allows readers to upload texts to test their
                    concentration in our era of constant interference (Carlos Flores’s La era de la
                        distracción); or a custom-made platform powered by Twilio
                    that allows users to create community-based narratives and poetry using Twitter
                    and SMS messaging, inspired by the games of subconscious creativity made famous
                    by the Surrealists (Tomás Vega’s Sinapsis Colectiva); among others. 

                14
Teaching this type of modular course involves a set of pedagogical challenges,
                    both theoretical and technical. It is not a question of simply theorizing about
                    the changes in authorship or originality, but also exercising technical
                    requirements involved in the construction of those topics. Thus, the course is
                    built around a workshop model, broadly inspired by Miriam Posner’s DH
                    experiments with “How Did They Make That?” where the
                    UCLA professor dissects paradigmatic DH projects to help her students get
                    started with their own work [Posner 2013]. This pedagogical
                    proposal is interdisciplinary in nature and is built by the addition of
                    different experiences and skills, underscoring the concept of
                        “community.” Incorporating this in the case of e-lit
                    requires the participation of several instructors, specialized in different
                    tools or capacities: a Python specialist, a professor of literary theory, a
                    Twitter bot guru, etc. In its ideal form, the course would invite multiple
                    instructors to the classroom, exposing students to alternative skills, literary
                    proposals, and teaching styles, forging a “teaching
                        community” reflecting the “creative community”
                    behind professional e-lit online.[8] Hence
                    teaching this type of course is not focused on knowledges or
                        skills, but on the ability to reach solutions to particular
                    problems, and its content will depend heavily on the actual student composition
                    of the class (modules will vary substantially if the majority of students come
                    from literature degrees or computer science backgrounds, for instance, focusing
                    more on structures or concepts accordingly). Taking into consideration the value
                    of previous knowledge and social evaluation, the teaching curriculum should be
                    determined on a case-by-case basis, just as it would in a professional, online,
                    e-lit setting. Correspondingly, a new challenge arises in selecting what type of
                    exercises and practices (rather than what type of tools and skills) should be
                    the most important in the development of reading and writing literacies within a
                    digital community. 

            

            
                E-lit as Digital Literacy

                15
But why talk about literacies and competencies and not
                    ability, skills, or even knowledge when talking about e-lit as DH pedagogy?
                    After all, literary studies have long revolved around the mastery of a series of
                        knowledges about different genres, periods, or authors—not to
                    mention the importance given to the mastery of close reading skills in U.S.
                    colleges. If this structure has worked so well for so long when teaching
                    literature, and e-lit is but a type (or mode) of literature, why call for a
                    different teaching methodology? Why suggest a new competency-based approach to
                    literature, rather than continue to polish up something we know how to do, and
                    to do well? 

                16
Competency-based learning, however, is hardly a new approach to higher education.
                    Since the 1970s, institutions like DePaul University’s School for New Learning
                    or State University of New York’s Empire State College have been exploring the
                    applications of this model of learning. In a recent article in the Chronicle of Higher Education, Dan Berrett highlighted
                    how the practice has been around for 40 years.[9] Reaching today almost 600 institutions,
                    Berrett even calls it “Higher Education’s next Big Thing”
                         [Berret 2015], while stressing that the approach has been mostly implemented in
                        “applied” degrees such as nursing, public health
                    disciplines, and the like. 

                17
As Joaquín Díaz-Corralejo and Alain Brouté suggest, nevertheless, I believe that
                    favoring the teaching of competencies can be implemented beyond traditional
                        “applied” degrees. This should not be read as a statement
                    contributing to the eviscerating of the humanities in the face of the
                    corporatization of the University, but as an opportunity to bring together the
                    liberal and the technical aspects of the current dilemma. Perhaps it would be
                    better to talk about teaching digital literacy, or literacies in a conceptual
                    way, rather than competencies, that can be hosted within the scope of Digital
                    Humanities courses.[10] Lankshear and
                    Knobel distinguish “conceptual” definitions from
                        “standardized operational” definitions of
                        “digital literacy.” Standardized operational definitions
                    are quite similar to the regurgitation of facts and of knowledge we see in the
                    worst cases of pure content-based teaching, presenting uncontextualized tasks,
                    performances and demonstrations of skills. Although knowledge of the tasks and
                    skills involved in dealing with digital works will be necessary in order to be
                    digitally literate in a conceptual way, this type of operational literacy leaves
                    little room for student’s creativity. By contrast, conceptual definitions of
                    digital literacy present views “couched as a general idea or ideal”
                         [Lankshear and Knobel 2008], enabling people to understand information however presented, letting
                    them match the medium they use to the information they are presented with, and
                    the audience they are presenting it to. 

                18
The competencies involved in this approach, based on students’ self-paced
                    progress and demonstrable measures of previously acquired learning—this is,
                    stressing the capacity to learn how to apply a set of related
                    knowledge and skills in order to perform a given task—point towards
                    an epistemological change. Its adoption in humanities courses focuses on the
                    student’s internal construction of meaning, and on her or his desire and ability
                    to behave as an autonomous and different agent [Díaz-Corralejo and Brouté 2013]. In other words, teaching competencies would categorize “to learn” as an
                    intransitive verb, rather than teaching to learn about something
                    concrete—e.g.: learning to play the piano as opposed to learning to recognize
                    (or repeat) a tune. By this I am proposing to teach “reading
                        literature” as “building,”
                    “designing,”
                    “touching” and/or “listening,” for
                    instance, rather than reading literature as something that depends on our eyes
                    and minds solely—an approach enacted by the combination of the writing and
                    making modules in the discussed e-lit course. It could even be argued that this
                    would follow a similar methodological turn to that experienced in foreign
                    language teaching, by stressing a communicative approach to language learning
                    and producing, rather than following drills and repetitions of memorized
                    explicit grammatical constructions, and readymade dialogues and situations. 

                19
Teaching digital writing and reading literacies through a competency-based
                    paradigm is further related with concepts of creativity and thought processing,
                    as well as engaging with the larger socioeconomic context, other discipline
                    related knowledge, and the student’s overall behavioral pattern and job
                    organizational skills [Díaz-Corralejo and Brouté 2013]. Finally, a pedagogical
                    framework based on competencies and not content-knowledge assumes the
                    acquisition of “expert knowledge”: complex, transversal, and,
                    what I am mostly interested in for the particular case of e-lit as a digital
                    humanities practice, transferable to other fields—beyond Hayles’ defense of
                    computation, to any discipline where this type of digital literacy may be
                    needed. 

                20
Perhaps in line with this belief, and in an effort to professionalize education
                    before students leave the university or pursue advanced graduate degrees, many
                    programs have been set to redefine the undergraduate student as
                        “apprentice researcher.” More likely than not, students
                    are assigned a project to improve certain knowledge or skills of their own,
                    while working on a faculty led project. In these cases, however, we do not
                    expect students to master the skills they are applying, but we hope they improve
                    them while learning to work collaboratively in a larger project. This is an
                    approach mostly internalized when teaching digital tools in most of
                    our DH courses, but teaching transferable, applied knowledge has not usually
                    been set at the forefront of literary studies curricula. As it happened with
                    earlier types of DH projects and apprentice structures, our engagement with
                    electronic literature requires a change of perspective, one that can benefit
                    from the type of applied skills and literacies we’ve become
                    familiar with thanks to DH practice, and that can, inversely, help us firm up
                    the value of humanistic knowledge when teaching (and living) in a digital realm. 

                21
I am using digital literacies as a shorthand for “the myriad social practices and conceptions of engaging
                            in meaning making mediated by texts that are produced, received,
                            distributed, exchanged, etc., via digital codification”
                         [Lankshear and Knobel 2008], which can be as varied as the behavior of different bloggers, writing an
                    academic paper online, or emailing a relative. We see how the practice of
                    linguistic competencies in digital environments has been absorbed by most of our
                    daily activities, and even though we have been told that reading has decreased
                    in the past few years, and that “current patterns in reading show that reading
                            print-base literature has dropped in popularity and will continue to do
                            so despite the modest rise in sales of books”
                         [Grigar 2008], the truth is that we read more than ever. Not only have we transferred
                    many communicative activities to the realm of our digital screens via text
                    messages or emails, but reading digitally has also been absorbed by popular
                    entertainment forms such as video games—not to mention more specialized
                    practices like machinima, digital animation, fanfiction writing, and the like.
                    As these become more and more complex, users are required to decipher new
                    patterns of narrativity that belong particularly to experiencing and advancing
                    in a digital story, which are very close to some current examples of e-lit.
                    Participating in these activities provides opportunities for gaining situated
                    meaning rather than the merely verbal (or literal) sorts that are, precisely “the kinds of meanings that underpin deep understanding
                            and competence, whether in work practices or academic disciplines. They
                            mark the difference between merely being able to parrot back content
                            (…), attaining sound theoretical understandings and being able to apply
                            these in concrete practical settings (displaying competence)”
                         [Lankshear and Knobel 2008].

                22
Along these lines, back in 2008 Dene Grigar commented on the increasing
                    popularity of video games as key forms of popular twenty-first century culture,
                    explaining how despite their narrative complexity video games are not perceived
                    as e-lit by many, and “according to some, [have] not achieved literary quality
                        on par with books.” But, she insists “they do have the potential to do
                        so,” and “when they do, e-lit may very well overtake print-based
                            literature in popularity”
                         [Grigar 2008]. Without having reached this utopian (although surely dystopian to some)
                    future where video games hold the same status as books, it is unquestionably
                    true that our relationship with storytelling and narrativity are changing thanks
                    to our interaction with digital forms of fiction. This, in turn, is not only
                    affecting our relationship with literature, but also demanding a
                    reconceptualization of how we read, write, and create stories, and,
                    consequently, how we teach and learn to write, read, critique, and build
                    stories. 

            

            
                E-Lit as a Foreign Language

                23
So, what would be the ideal space to develop these essential digital literacies?
                        Where and under what departments could we teach how to write,
                    read, critique and build electronic literature within the University? Although I
                    have acknowledged the presence of literature DH courses in English departments,
                    perhaps due to the link between computing and composition that Kirschenbaum
                    suggested, when talking more precisely about e-lit, we are dealing with a type
                    of literature that moves easily between media, but also between languages,
                    between linguistic traditions, and thus a comparative framework may present
                    itself as a more suitable approach. Jessica Pressman has proposed this very
                    successfully, when she explains that electronic literature is
                    Comparative Literature. “It is born digital; it operates across multiple machine
                            and human languages, and requires translation of these languages before
                            it even reaches the human reader”
                         [Pressman 2014]. It is procedural and computational and is processed across multiple
                    platforms, protocols, and technologies, in accordance with the constraints and
                    technical specificities of hardware, software, and network configurations. E-lit
                    combines text, image, sound, movement, interactivity, and design, challenging
                    traditional disciplinary boundaries as well as genre categories [Pressman 2014]. For these and other reasons, electronic literature
                    requires its reader to read and think comparatively, and thus e-lit should
                    naturally be read under a comparative literature lens. 

                24
Defending this comparative literature perspective to the teaching of born-digital
                    literature, Rebecca Walkowitz further compares it to what she calls
                        “born-translated” novels. These are works that have been
                    written for multiple world audiences in mind, sometimes published in several
                    languages at the same time, or in a language (usually English) other than the
                    native tongue of the writer in an exercise of “preemptive
                        translation.” She explains how this practice—the division of
                    writing and speaking languages in translation—was the expectation for late
                    medieval and early modern European writers who often circulated their work in
                    Latin in order to reach wider audiences and build communities of knowledge up
                    until the late eighteenth century, when the era of national languages and
                    literary traditions would be inaugurated [Walkowitz 2015].
                    Although Walkowitz admits that we are still part of that era where “the expectation that the language of writing will match
                            the language of speech remains dominant”
                         [Walkowitz 2015, 12], e-lit may take us back to a time before national languages and literary
                    traditions. The language, on this occasion, is not necessarily a natural one,
                    but a combination of those regional plus the addition of computation and the
                    non-linguistic signifiers, such as kinetic, aural and interactivity knowledges,
                    that come about e-lit production. More than talking about a given language, or
                    the comparison between two, we need to be thinking about the combination and
                    coexistence of several languages.

                25
Expanding on Pressman’s and Walkowitz’s observations, I have also proposed
                    somewhere else that e-lit could be read as a Foreign Language Literature.
                    Precisely, due to the interdisciplinary nature of the e-lit field and the
                    multilayered qualities of the digital objects under study—and despite
                    Pressman’s, Walkowitz’s and Kirschenbaum’s claims—these courses give rise to
                    suspicion in both the English and Comparative Literature Departments, as well as
                    the Media Studies departments; e-lit not being literary enough for the first
                    two, but paying too much attention to poetics over media for the latter. E-lit
                    is something intrinsically hybrid, going beyond English or technical praxis, and
                    this hybridity is better served by being taught through competence-based models
                    of literacy than as a content-based literature course. My earlier claim of
                    teaching e-lit as DH literacy is what allows me to also claim that e-lit belongs
                    in Foreign Language Departments. After all, we are facing a type of literature
                    that necessarily combines different (semiotic) languages (sound,
                    movement, text), but also programming and formal languages (JavaScript, Perl,
                    Phyton, etc.) and natural languages that can be expressed in different tongues
                    (Spanish, Portuguese, Norwegian, etc.), that can or cannot be framed by any
                    single one of these languages’ literary traditions. Couldn’t we think of this
                    combination as a foreign language in itself? The ultimate global
                    language? If e-lit is seen as a foreign language, its teaching would easily fall
                    under foreign language departments’ responsibilities. 

                26
Furthermore, since what I’m proposing is the teaching of applied competencies to
                    the learning of these languages in a community setting, foreign language labs
                    are already a familiar setting where we have been, or should have been,
                    implementing similar teaching methodologies for many years—at least since the
                    pedagogical turn to communicative language teaching in the 1980s. These are
                    usually dynamic spaces habilitated with computers and video and audio devices
                    where students of different languages, coming from diverse classes and levels of
                    proficiency can go to learn individually and complete projects, meet as groups,
                    or join faculty in group activities without the rigidity of a fixed desk
                    environment. Language labs usually offer resources that complement formal
                    teaching, allowing students to pursue their individual interests like watching
                    films or listening to music of a given language that would not usually be part
                    of the language instruction curriculum. However, most of the language
                    instruction at the university level is still confined to the classroom,
                    considering lab activities as additional practice, not being really
                    incorporated to the course grading or assignment structure. 

                27
If electronic literature can be approached as a way to teach digital humanities
                    and vice versa, why not think of the language lab in the same tradition of the
                    DH laboratory where technological tools are built and applied? As Amy Earhart
                    has stressed “[d]igital humanities labs are experimental models
                            attempting to fill the various needs of the digital humanities community
                            including the desire to expand the field, support a broad range of
                            projects, and provide training for students and faculty”
                         [Earhart 2015]. Moreover, the DH lab presents itself as a neutral space—resisting
                    divisional arrangements regarding colleges or departments, for example—, being
                    able to foster collaborative work that uses the laboratory as “more than a space, but a symbol of our hopes”
                         [Earhart 2015]. Perhaps we could rethink the foreign language lab as a place to nurture
                    the same type of research and pedagogical resources (and hopes) for the e-lit
                        community.[11]

            

            
                E-lit as a Global Community 

                28
However, as it happens with most literature, the majority of e-lit that is taught
                    and produced in the world happens outside the lab and the
                    classroom. In Electronic Literature Communities,
                    Scott Rettberg and Patricia Tomaszek explain that e-lit’s dependence on the
                    global network has made the development of electronic literature more
                    international in nature than any previous literary traditions [Rettberg and Tomaszek 2015]. And, despite the fact that “the French, Spanish, German, Dutch, Brazilian,
                            Scandinavian, English, American, and Canadian electronic literature
                            communities, for example, don’t necessarily speak the same languages, we
                            are all becoming increasingly aware of each other’s work. The field of
                            electronic literature is a network of networks, and we are only
                            beginning to learn how to work together”
                         [Rettberg 2009]. This landscape seems to assume that there is something inherently global
                    about e-lit that would make us wonder if we can, or if we even should, talk
                    about e-lit in different languages. Because the e-lit community is
                    intertwined with the global network it has been posed as essentially
                    international, belonging even to an earlier era of “preemptive
                        translation,” and “yet it is still the case that many communities are
                            emerging from and are responsive to national and language based literary
                            traditions”
                         [Rettberg and Tomaszek 2015]. Under this lens, and in my particular case, I wonder what Spanish
                    (Hispanic?) e-lit would look like, for example? What elements (beyond language)
                    would be decisive in its conceptualization? And where would we
                    locate it if talking about geopolitical frontiers in the Web has long become
                    pointless? In other words, how to think about it under my previous consideration
                    of e-lit as some sort of ultimate global language? 

                29
In the case of born-translated novels, Walkowitz explains how this type of
                    literature, written for multiple audiences, has developed strategies for
                    multilingualism “design for the foreign, confluent, and semi fluent
                            readers who will encounter them”
                         [Walkowitz 2015]. The reader of born-translated fiction would no longer be a master of
                    many languages, but is “expected to understand less because understanding all
                            the languages in the globe would be impossible, and to understand
                            differently because new units of the book become meaningful”
                         [Walkowitz 2015]. This is what Walkowitz understands as “recognizing
                        incomprehensibility”; learning how incomprehension operates
                    within, and not simply between communities. “In an age of global migration, it is impossible to know
                            all the languages or even to comprehend all versions of the same
                            language”
                         [Walkowitz 2015, 216]—which is not a claim to romanticize either the technologies of
                    circulation, since they do not promise total comprehension either, but it
                    highlights the incoherencies of the global multiplicity.

                30
Similarly, some productive approaches to thinking electronic literature in
                    relation to the global have abandoned the idea of languages and geographies all
                    together by proposing a new definition of literary writing in relation to world
                    literature: “Only a redistribution of concepts, a way of thinking
                            about the conditions of literary writing, will take us to a place, a
                            collaborative workplace, where works by many different authors can reach
                            a selective audience more diverse than any faction could be”
                         [Tabbi 2010]. Rather than attempting to produce a cross section of world literature in
                    digital media, Tabbi’s approach is to advance a notion of the
                        literary different from the print-based model that is so thoroughly
                    embedded in the very idea of a world literature. Other equally embedded ideas,
                    he says, “like the ‘grand thought’ of freedom
                            (Brandes, Auerbach), and the yearning toward universality, also need to
                            be investigated in the conception of cyber visionaries no less than in
                            longtime scenarios of world literature”
                         [Tabbi 2010]. 

                31
Reinforcing my earlier claims, what is universal for Tabbi is no longer a single
                    world vision that necessarily transcends its national, racial, gendered, or
                    cultural origins. What is universal instead is the ability, by observing the
                    constraints on the current world system as it configures itself in our actual
                    digital writing spaces, to enter into meaningful conversations with other
                    creators in written (as well as non-written) forms. In this sense, world
                    literature, the digital networks that support it, and the social networks that
                    sustain it can be regarded as an alternative formation to globalization. What is
                        “literary” in this heterogeneous sample of world
                    literature can be recognized in this capacity to disturb the smooth operation of
                    global communications as Tabbi insists, using textual instruments whose
                    operations are largely conceptual. Indeed, one important accomplishment of e-lit
                    may have been to locate narrativity not as a literary universal but as one of
                    many qualities best realized in the particular medium of print [Tabbi 2010]. In this sense, digital media would not be a threat to
                    the life of books or literature, but would help us in a revaluation and
                    relocation of the literary in multiple media. At the same time, the question of
                    setting the digital literary as something experienceable beyond
                    language, supports the importance and utmost pertinence of thinking about e-lit
                    as something written, in practical terms, in another language—one
                    made of many, a born-collective language—as I am proposing here. 

            

            
                Working Collectively as Digital Literacy

                32
The performative and flexible nature of an electronic literature framework,
                    moving through multiple spaces and languages as Tabbi reminds us, is what
                    defines the digital literary as something that goes beyond the human language of
                    choice (engaging frontally with digital literacy). I believe this framework
                    makes a strong case in support of the teaching of e-lit in foreign language
                    departments. This is a linguistic question, of course, but also an
                    administrative one, where highlighting the bureaucratic constraints over the
                    matter becomes very important. While e-lit has a foothold in academia, Rettberg
                    points out how most of the academic positions in the field are held by critics
                    or theorists while authors of electronic literature have been less likely to
                    find employment. Likewise, students have been allowed to write dissertations on
                    e-lit, but very few places (if any) would permit them to present their writing
                    as a work of electronic literature [Rettberg 2009].

                33
When it comes to the expression of the e-lit community outside
                    academia, by publishing their code (and complete works) openly on the Web, many
                    digital artists and writers are manifesting that in order to make the field
                    flourish, “[w]e don’t need to build a market for electronic
                            literature, but rather a culture that will support and sustain its
                            development”
                         [Rettberg 2009]. Rettberg goes back to the idea of establishing a gift economy system
                    where materials, resources, and even collected works and anthologies are shared,
                    and where members of the community participate in conferences and publications
                    (perhaps scholarly based, but not necessarily). Although many people “are
                        inclined to believe that if something comes for free,” he explains “then it must be ‘valueless[,]’ [t]he history of the
                            twentieth century avant-garde is, however, replete with examples of
                            artistic and literary movements, notably the Dada and Fluxus, which
                            managed to have a great deal of lasting influence in spite of the fact
                            that they worked outside of the conventional cultural economy of their
                            day”
                         [Rettberg 2009]. Following this logic, Rettberg concludes that the best way to produce
                    readers of e-lit would be to produce more digital writers. 

                34
Teaching digital literacies as (global) e-lit and vice versa—understanding e-lit
                    as a DH discipline—implies questioning institutional aspects related to how we
                    traditionally work in humanities departments. It implies questioning not only
                    the content of our curricula, but also how we teach and study said curricula,
                    something already underscored by much DH scholarship and activism.[12] When looking at e-lit as DH implementation, I believe that the most
                    revolutionary change (and the most natural and intrinsic change coming from our
                    experiences of working in digital environments) has to do with experiencing a
                        community as a working practice, and including the
                    learning of working collaboratively as an essential
                        digital (cultural) literacy. The implementation of
                    a community as a framework for creating and exploring literature in a
                    collective, collaborative manner rejects the classic idea of the literary
                    creator or critic who writes following an individual experiencing of the world
                    that he or she can translate to the benefit of the rest of humanity—an outdated
                    romantic conceptualization of work, sitting at the core of most modern
                    conceptions of literature, yet still prevalent behind the structuring of most of
                    our universities. 

                35
Conveniently, from an epistemological point of view, implementing a
                    community-oriented framework to the pedagogical experience grants germane
                    importance to the practice of learning competencies (versus content-knowledge or
                    capacity). Teaching competencies in a community setting favors collective
                    learning, valuing prior knowledge (gained outside the learning community or in a
                    different one), while it considers the complexity of these activities within
                    their social evaluation and their context in a shared manner. Returning to
                    Díaz-Corralejo and Brouté, applying competency-based pedagogy to the teaching of
                    literature would imply taking on the collective perspective of socio cultural
                    research paradigms, similar to those coming from action theories, situational
                    cognition and problem solving frameworks [Díaz-Corralejo and Brouté 2013].
                    This perspective would not be the typical practice of literary scholars or
                    academics, but, as I would like to suggest, it is the best approach when dealing
                    with the concepts at hand, because building a community of readers and writers
                    has been intrinsic to the field of electronic literature from its very
                    beginnings. 

                36
In “Electronic literature: a Critical Writing and Making
                        Course” we replicated this experience by encouraging students to work
                    in projects where their different skills could be shared. Students coming from
                    computer science backgrounds were paired with rhetoric or literature students in
                    order to build together a joint narrative or poem that intertwined high
                    linguistic, language, and literary values with good programming design. Students
                    with different levels of mastery over the Spanish language also helped those
                    with weaker language skills, since this class incorporated different language
                    levels, something not very common in our traditional divisions of language
                    instruction. Students benefited from each other’s and the group’s set of
                    knowledges, expanding their worldview thanks to their different disciplinary
                    gaze or language skills. They also shared their work with the world by posting
                    everything in a open bilingual website, rather than uploading their assignments
                    privately through Berkeley’s online blackboard platform, and shared their work
                    through social media with their friends and relatives, expanding the classroom
                    content beyond our classroom walls. 

                37
As Scott Rettberg has expressed, e-lit has always been a field deeply rooted in
                    the idea of community, mostly built on the Web as a communal space, and
                    structured around the paradigms of the gift economy. In “Communitizing Electronic Literature” he explains how, when the World
                    Wide Web was being adopted at a popular level, “the community of electronic writers writ large made a
                            consequential choice”
                         [Rettberg 2009] to publish online rather than in CD-Rom or floppies” because the
                    multitudinous Web offered writers the opportunity to reach a wider audience,
                    more global in a geographical sense, and across different languages. Publishing
                    online, nevertheless, implies a demonetization of the product, while it assumes
                        another type of value based on sharing, and on the
                    establishment of a community of producers and consumers not rooted in the
                    exchange of currencies. 

                38
Thinking about the material conditions for teaching becomes evident when trying
                    to build a pedagogical structure for community learning because, although the
                    Web exists and is there for us to access, we as professors in
                    humanities departments, make our teaching experience happen mostly in a
                    classroom, within university walls. In order to implement these ideas of
                    community networks under other very material institutional constraints it
                    becomes essential that we, professors, and not only we,
                        DHers or we, e-lit peeps reflect seriously on the role
                    of the university and our different home departments in the establishment and
                    adaptation of (e-lit) community practices. Within DH practice, the work done by
                    the Scholar’s Lab at the University of Virginia may be a good example to think
                    through our duties as instructors and students, and our responsibility and place
                    with the larger Institution, but I haven’t seen the same institutional
                    background for projects relating to born digital literature. Moreover, when
                    thinking about e-lit, we should underscore the relation with new realities of
                    reading, writing and working by digital means that affect us all
                    beyond language departments. Where do we stand, as a broader teaching community,
                    in relation to the aforementioned concepts of the global literary, new literacy
                    competencies, and the humanities academic curriculum? 

            

            
                Beyond the classroom—Literary versus Literacy: What’s at Stake?

                39
As I hope to have proven, rethinking our notion of literacy through
                    the practice of electronic literature involves expanding what we understand by
                    digital literacy. Following Dene Grigar, who builds on Cynthia Selfe’s Technology and Literacy in the Twenty-First Century, I
                    propose that technical literacy today should not be seen simply as “a complex set of socially and culturally situated
                            values, practices, and skills involved in operating linguistically
                            within the context of electronic environments, including reading,
                            writing, and communicating”
                         [Selfe 1999][Grigar 2008]. Instead, it should be extended to incorporate
                    the mastery of visual, sonic, kinetic, and kinesthetic modalities, allowing us
                    to situate contemporary knowledges within “a more adequate, richer, better account of the
                            world”
                         [Selfe 1999][Grigar 2008]; a world that reflects upon the multilingual
                    nature of its global multiplicity. Such an approach would mean “that art forms that include a literary component could
                            be used to promote literacy”
                         [Grigar 2008]. 

                40
Teaching e-lit, accordingly, should help us in the learning of technical
                    literacy, as Grigar suggests. And this is an important statement given that,
                    regardless of the disciplinary focus, there seems to be generalized consensus on
                    the importance of developing some sort of technical literacy as
                    part of the contemporary undergraduate curriculum. Going a step further, I
                    propose that, when dealing with e-lit, tinkering with the technical aspects that
                    are involved in the creation of digital works (a hands-on approach that I’ve
                    reiterated to be essential in order to fully comprehend the poetics and
                    narrativity of digital artworks) can teach us valuable lessons about what it
                    means for any work to have literary value—or, better yet, to
                        be literary—in our twenty-first century digital circumstance.
                    In other words, by understanding that e-lit is a type of literature that
                    incorporates a literary aspect that emerges from a work’s
                    exploitation of its digitality, and that this aspect, correspondingly, can help
                    us gain important insights about the overall comprehension of the ontology of
                    the literary (beyond technical literacy and competencies), it is not difficult
                    to see why redefining this literary aspect–or literary
                        elements–of today’s digital objects should become paramount.

                41
The literary however, is a slippery term that evaporates the minute
                    one tries to analyze it. In “The Idiocy of the Literary (and
                        what does it have to do with digital humanities?)” Sandy Baldwin has
                    acutely noticed: “[l]iterary criticism says nothing about the category of
                            the literary. It describes literary works and makes distinctions between
                            them because they are literary. A novel or poem may be good or bad, but
                            it is a subject of criticism because it is literary”
                         [Baldwin 2013]. Baldwin carries on explaining how literary scholars know about the
                    extent and complexity of critical classifications and theories applied to
                    literature, and acknowledges that knowing these is what makes us good literary
                    critics, “but it does not equip us to consider the
                            literary”
                         [Baldwin 2013]. The self-evidence of literature, as he puts it, “the given-ness that there are works of literature—makes
                            literary criticism the worst way to consider the literary”
                         [Baldwin 2013].

                42
Baldwin’s controversial statement is a very productive way to start thinking the
                    relationship between reading and writing competencies (to their pedagogical
                    extent) in the digital realm. His approach also helps us think through the
                        literary question beyond electronic literature, or, going even
                    further, to use e-lit to rethink and evaluate the digital humanities as the
                    larger field from which I am proposing we study it. Questioning the problem of
                    the literary (together with those other more obvious terms that have been
                    consistently challenged over the past few decades such as
                        “author” or our notion of “reader” or
                    even “work”) may help us advance humanistic and literary
                    theories from the lens of the digital, whether the literature itself is digital
                    or not. 

                43
In the same essay about the relationship between digital humanities and
                    electronic literature, Baldwin proposes that one of the essential
                        aspects—the essential aspect—of digital humanities is precisely
                    the question of the literary, “literally of the letter on the screen”
                         [Baldwin 2013]. By this, Baldwin underlines a chiasm that separates matter and
                    conceptuality or, appearance and abstraction. “In this chiasm, the digital letter is both literal and
                            figurative. It is, in short, literary. Not only this, but the letter is
                            poetic. It produces the system that will enable digital
                            humanities”
                         [Baldwin 2013]. In Baldwin’s essay, the resulting conditions for (Uni)code, “for storage, for processing, and so on, are produced
                            poetically from the literary, that is, from the letter as the given-ness
                            of a category, as an announcement that extends itself and exhausts
                            itself in doing so”
                         [Baldwin 2013]. He bases his analysis on the practice of TEI encoding to elaborate how
                    digital humanities as a field of enquiry has been systematized around a set of
                    categories for objects and discourses that work around literature without the
                    literary. According to this, the literary would come to mean “a domain of excess and difference that is
                            institutionalized as creativity or innovation”
                         [Baldwin 2013]. At the very least, Baldwin believes DH to be “uncomfortable with this sense of the literary”
                         [Baldwin 2013]. 

                44
Like Baldwin I believe that most of the current DH practices handle and present
                    the literary domain, but do not participate in it. Tools for analysis,
                    terminological databases, mapping and visualizations, etc., assume the
                    productivity of poetics of the literary, but are not literary. In Baldwin’s
                    words, digital humanities “follows the trajectory of the literary but is not
                            literary itself. It insists that it is methodological. Such insistence
                            lets digital humanities operate on and make a project out of the
                            literary”
                         [Baldwin 2013]. When it comes to literature and DH, then, we face a literature
                        emptied of the literary in contemporary research projects about
                    literature. Literature could be the object of digital humanities,
                    but the not the literary itself. 

                45
How can we think the concept of the (digital) literary? In order to imagine a
                        “meta-digital humanities of the literary” Baldwin
                    proposes to rethink both the digital and the humanities at large.
                    Agreeing with him, and while recognizing the valuable insights gained by turning
                    literature into narratable data (as would happen with Unicode), I suggest we
                    also start working on experiencing the literary in itself.
                    Evidently, what I am suggesting implies rethinking our ways of experimenting
                    with digital tools, language, and literature in a literary way. And
                    this brings me back to the question of how to teach digital humanities
                        through electronic literature. 

                46
Learning how to look at a digital object while questioning how it is made in the
                    way I have been suggesting with this pedagogical proposal of teaching e-lit as
                    DH literacy, becomes essential because the application of technical literacies
                    to the creation of digital prose and poetry is the best way to experience the
                    very slippery concept of the (digital) literary. By developing critical and
                    maker competencies in this manner, the literary stops being something abstract,
                    and become something almost concrete that can be performed and built.

                47
Investing in the establishment of a Digital Humanities curriculum where e-lit
                    sits at the center is essential for the coherent evolution of literary studies
                    in the twenty-first century, from a research perspective to a curricular
                    development need. Moreover, and considering the global nature of the digital
                    writing field, this type of literary studies should push for an international
                    and multilingual nature that reflects the true linguistic diversity of our
                    campuses—highlighting Spanish in the case of my own Californian institution, but
                    not exclusively. I’m not talking about an absorption of Spanish e-lit into the
                    study of a new global digital language, but about the leveling of Spanish as a
                    foreign language with the global digital language that is electronic
                    literature—that may not be as foreign to us nowadays after all. Finally, opening
                    a space for writers, readers, students and teachers to learn together the
                    necessary competencies to explore the literary in its new digital circumstance
                    can illuminate important aspects of DH as a field of inquiry and teaching.
                    Rather than take the digital to make a project of the literary, what I am
                    stressing is that the digital and the literary are to
                    be experienced throughout, one coming out of the other and vice versa. I believe
                    this could broaden our current DH practices and scholarship, and, most
                    importantly, help us firm up the value and nature of the Humanities in the
                    university today. 

            

        
        
            
        
    

Notes
[1]  Within a broad range of works, the ELO distinguishes hypertext
                        fiction and poetry, on and off the Web, kinetic poetry presented in Flash
                        and using other platforms, computer art installations with literary aspects,
                        conversational characters, also known as chatterbots, interactive fiction,
                        novels that take the form of emails, SMS messages, or blogs, poems and
                        stories that are generated by computers, collaborative writing projects, and
                        literary performances online that develop new ways of writing [Electronic Literature Organization n.d.].
[2]  In his influential book, Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature, Espen J. Aarseth
                        describes ergodic literature as that which requires a nontrivial effort from
                        the reader to traverse the text. “If ergodic literature is to make sense
                            as a concept, there must also be nonergodic literature, where the effort
                            to traverse the text is trivial, with no extranoematic responsibilities
                            placed on the reader except (for example) eye movement and the periodic
                            or arbitrary turning of pages”
                        [Aarseth 1997]. Although Aarseth applies this concept to both
                        born–digital and certain experimental codex works such as Julio Cortázar’s
                            Hopscotch, the term has been adopted by
                        e–lit criticism to describe cyber interaction with the narrative.
[3]  While literary studies have put
                        close reading at the center of most analytical work, Franco Moretti has put
                        emphasis on the importance of “distant reading,” this is,
                        understanding literature by turning it into data that can be aggregated and
                        analyzed in massive amounts. This DH practice is intended to look at the
                        great scope of literature, rather than closely looking at an
                        established—evidently more limited—canon of works [Moretti 2013].
[4]  Since Fall 2015, DH at
                        Berkeley has founded 18 courses: Fall 2015: 3 courses, in Political Science,
                        Art History, and Music; Spring 2016: 3 courses, in the School of
                        Information, Spanish, and Music; Fall 2016: 3 courses, in Art History,
                        Theater Dance & Performance Studies, and Rhetoric/New Media; Spring
                        2017: 9 courses, in the Graduate School of Education, Art History (2
                        courses), Near Eastern Studies (2 courses), History (2 courses), Ethnic
                        Studies, and English.
[5]  I’d like to thank the
                        Berkeley DH Council, as well as Dean Anthony Cascardi and DH Executive
                        Director and Academic Coordinator Claudia Von Vacano for their support with
                        this project. 
[6]  This undergraduate DH course is the first to
                        be taught at the Berkeley Center for New Media in Spanish. I am grateful to
                        Greg Niemeyer, then director of the BCNM, and to my own department of
                        Spanish and Portuguese, for the opportunity to teach a class in Spanish
                        inside and outside of the Spanish and Portuguese Department,
                        since I believe this is a step forward in expanding the role of Spanish on
                        campus, while coherently contributing to the multilingual makeup of our
                        Californian university.
[7]  As course evaluations showed, students’ satisfaction with the
                        course received 7/7, exceeding departmental averages, highlighting the sense
                        of community and group agency created by the course. One student commented
                            “I found myself doing so much more research about e-lit outside of the
                            classroom and aside from homeworks (sic) because I wanted
                            to learn more. After class I'm still thinking about the material and
                            talking about it with my friends”; other: “I appreciated working in
                            groups and as a class to present to the campus. I feel that as a class
                            (even though there aren't many of us), we are making important
                            advancements and help spread the word and understanding about e-lit.
                            After having taken this course, I feel like a mini-unofficial-ambassador
                            of e-lit.”
[8]  In practical terms, during the Spring
                        2016, this course has been taught by a Spanish literature professor, a
                        specially trained graduate student, a member from Berkeley’s research IT,
                        and has received the visit of four different e-lit scholars and/or artists
                        from Mexico, Portugal, Puerto Rico and the United States. 
[9]  Berrett underscores three
                            “Key Eras of Growth for Competency-Based Learning”:
                        The 1970s, when “Institutions like Alverno College, DePaul University’s
                            School for New Learning, Regents College (now Excelsior College), the
                            State University of New York’s Empire State College, and Thomas Edison
                            State College are the first adopters. They seek to make higher education
                            available to a growing population of adult students by using
                            demonstrable outcomes and measures of previously acquired learning to
                            assess what students know. The approach allows students to make progress
                            at their own pace instead of following the traditional academic
                            calendar”; The late 1990s, when “the governors of 11 states agree,
                            in 1997, to create a virtual college to help students acquire training
                            for in-demand jobs like information technology, teaching, and nursing.
                            Western Governors University reaches 71 students in 1999, its first year
                            in operation. By 2015, it enrolls more than 62,000 students. Its scale
                            is enabled by online tools, a competency-based method, and the
                            separation of faculty roles into those who assess learning and those who
                            provide academic coaching”; And today, when “Southern New Hampshire
                            University, in 2013, becomes the first institution approved to award
                            federal financial aid based on students’ demonstrated progress instead
                            of the credit hour. That same year, the University of Wisconsin begins
                            offering its own competency-based program, signaling mainstream
                            acceptance of the idea. A year later, the Competency-Based Education
                            Network forms. The coalition of 17 institutions and two state systems
                            seeks to share information on this method of learning, guide its
                            development, and stake out principles for high-quality programs. Now
                            nearly 600 institutions are now seriously exploring competency-based
                            education”
                        [Berret 2015].
[10]  Due to the sheer diversity of specific accounts of
                            “digital literacy” that are out there, and their
                        consequent implications for digital literacy policies, Colin Lankshear and
                        Michele Knobel consider it better to talk about literacies, in
                        its plural form, to incorporate similar terms such as computer literacy,
                        information literacy, technological literacy, media literacy, communication
                        literacy and the like [Lankshear and Knobel 2008].
[11]  In her article “The Digital Humanities
                            as a Laboratory,” Amy Earhart notices how academic institutions
                        are experimenting with different structures to leverage DH work. She
                        highlights the formation of DH Labs like the Stanford Literary Lab
                        (Stanford), Scholar’s Lab (University of Virginia), Digital Scholarship Lab
                        (U of Richmond), Humanities and CriticalCode Studies Lab (USC), Electronic
                        Textual Cultures Lab (U Victoria), The Humanities Laboratories (Duke U), and
                        The CulturePlex Laboratory (Western U), among others.
[12]  The
                        scholarship is wide on the topic. For overarching perspectives please view
                            Debates in the Digital Humanities, Matthew
                        K. Gold Ed (2012), The American Literature Scholar in
                            the Digital Age by Amy Earhart and Andrew Jewell (2011), Defining Digital Humanities: A Reader, Melissa
                        Terras, Julianne Nyhan and Edward Vanhoutte Eds., or the very recent Between Humanities and the Digital (2015) edited
                        by Patrik Svensson and David Theo Goldberg. Also consider the work done by
                        the Scholars’ Lab at the University of Virginia, and the many panels and
                        ongoing conversations being held at organizations such as HASTAC and ADHO,
                        and even special interest groups like Global Outlook::Digital Humanities.
                    

Works Cited
Aarseth 1997 Aarseth, E. J. Cibertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature, Johns Hopkins
                    University Press, Baltimore (1997). 
Baldwin 2013 Baldwin, S. “The
                        Idiocy of the Literary (and what does it have to do with digital
                        humanities?),”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly, 7.1 (2013): n.p. http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000155/000155.html.
Berret 2015 Berrett, D. “How a
                        40-Year-Old Idea Became Higher Education’s Next Big Thing,”
                    Chronicle of Higher Education, 28 October, n.p.,
                    Available from: http://chronicle.com/article/How-a-40-Year-Old-Idea-Became/233976 [29
                    October 2015]
Digital Humanities at Berkeley n.d. “About,” Digital Humanities at Berkeley, Available from:
                        http://digitalhumanities.berkeley.edu/about [27 October 2015]
Díaz-Corralejo and Brouté 2013 Díaz-Corralejo Conde, J. and Brouté, A. “Competencias de lecto-escritura en pantalla: su
                            evolución.” In M. Goicoechea and P. García Carcedo
                    (eds). Alicia a través de la
                            pantalla: Lecturas literarias en el siglo XXI.
                    Fundación Germán Sánchez Ruipérez, Madrid (2013), pp. 261-280.
Earhart 2015 Earhart, A. “The
                        Digital Humanities as a Laboratory,” in Goldberg D.T. and Svensson P.
                    (eds), Between Humanities and the Digital, MIT
                    Press, Boston (2015), pp. 391-400. 
Electronic Literature Organization n.d. “What is E-Lit,” Electronic Literature Organization,
                    Available from: https://eliterature.org/what-is-e-lit/ [14 October 2015]
Grigar 2008 Grigar, D. “Electronic Literature: Where is it?,” Electronic Book
                    Review. Available from: http://www.electronicbookreview.com/thread/technocapitalism/invigorating
                    [14 October 2015]
Hayles 2008 Hayles, N. K. Electronic Literature: New Horizons for the Literary. University of
                    Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame (2008)
Jackaki and Faull 2015 Jackaki, D. and Faull K.
                        “Pedagogical Hermeneutics and Teaching DH in a Liberal
                        Arts Context,” Diane Jackaki Personal Website, blog post, July 10.
                    Available from: http://dianejakacki.net/pedagogical-hermeneutics-and-teaching-dh-in-a-liberal-arts-context/
                    [3 October 2015]
Kirschenbaum 2011 Kirschenbaum, M. “What is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in English
                        Departments?” in Debates in the Digital
                        Humanities, ed. Matthew K. Gold. Minnesota University Press (2012),
                    pp. 3-11
Lankshear and Knobel 2008 Lankshear, C and
                    Knobel, M. “Introduction” in Lankshear, C., and
                    Knobel, M. (eds), Digital Literacies: Concepts, Policies
                        and Practices. Peter Lang Publishing, New York (2008), pp.
                    1-16
Moretti 2013 Moretti, F. Distant Reading. Verso, London (2013)
Posner 2013 Posner, M. “How
                        Did They Make That?” Miriam Posner’s Blog, 29 August. Available from:
                        http://miriamposner.com/blog/how-did-they-make-that/ [15 October
                    2015]
Pressman 2014 Pressman, J. “Electronic Literature as Comparative Literature,”
                    The 2014-2015 Report on the State of the Discipline of
                        Comparative Literature, 28 June. Available from: http://stateofthediscipline.acla.org/entry/electronic-literature-comparative-literature-0
                    [28 March 2016] 
Rettberg 2009 Rettberg, S. “Communitizing Electronic Literature,”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly 3.2 (2009): n.p. http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/2/000046/000046.html
Rettberg and Tomaszek 2015 Rettberg, S, and
                    Tomaszek P. “Electronic Literature Communities,” in
                    Rettberg, S., Tomaszek, P. and Baldwin S. (eds), Electronic
                        Literature Communities. West Virginia University Press, Morgantown,
                    (2015) (pre-print)
Selfe 1999 Selfe, C. L. Technology and Literacy in the Twenty-First Century: The Importance of
                        Paying Attention. Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale
                    (1999)
Tabbi 2010 Tabbi, J. “Electronic Literature as World Literature; or, The Universality of Writing
                        Under Constraint,”
                    Poetics Today 31. 1 (2010): 17-50. 
Walkowitz 2015 Walkowitz, R. Born Translated: The Contemporary Novel in an Age of World
                        Literature. Columbia University Press, New York (2015)

2017 11.3
             | 
            XML
            | 
            Print Article


Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

 
            URL: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000314/000314.html
Last updated:
            
 Comments: dhqinfo@digitalhumanities.org
 Published by:
            The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
Affiliated with: Literary and Linguistic Computing
 Copyright 2005 - 
[image: Creative Commons License]
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
        


