




	


	
		

			

		

	
				
						
										Metro
									
	
										Sports
									
	
										Business & Tech
									
	
										Opinion
									
	
										Politics
									
	
										Lifestyle
									
	
										Arts
									
	
										
										Cars
									
	
										
										Real Estate
									


				

				
					Most popular on BostonGlobe.com


		
				
							
								[image: ]
							

							Months after the Codfather went to prison, economic misery persists in New Bedford

		 				
					
	
				
							
								[image: ]
							

							Salem State student, father of three were innocent victims in Jamaica Plain shooting

		 				
					
	
				
							
								[image: ]
							

							A Celtics-Sixers photo for the ages. And the photographer behind the shot.

		 				
					
	
				
							
								[image: ]
							

							Rudy Giuliani has ‘always been this way,’ John Oliver says

		 				
					



						
						
							
	





	
								Today's Paper
							
	
								Magazine
							
	
								Obituaries
							
	
								Weather
							
	
								Comics
							
	
								Crossword
							
	
								The Big Picture
							



					
						
						
							
	

		
			
			Menu
		
		
			
				
	

				
	

		

	
	Opinion
		
	
		
			HOV lane on Expressway closed due to crash
		
	


	
		
			HOV lane on Expressway closed due to crash
		

	








		
	


	


	


			


		
			
				Opinion | Tracy Carlson

	Humanities and business go hand in hand

	

					



		
	      
	      	



				Share via e-mail

				

				
					
					To
					
					Add a message
					
					Your e-mail
					
					
				

			

	    
	    	
	      
	      	

	
	      
	      	

	
			
				 		

	
	      

	
			
				

Print
			
		
			
		
			  


			  Comments
			
		
	
	

		
			
	

			
			
			
	
		
		
			
	[image:  ]
		
			Shutterstock / wavebreakmedia

			


		
	

	By Tracy Carlson
	
			
 
		
	April 24, 2016



						
						

							
									High school seniors, the college acceptance season just ended. Thick envelopes (or their digital equivalent) have been sent. 
You’re in, somewhere. Now the question is: What should you major in? I know what you’ve been told: Make it something “practical,” like Economics, Business Administration, or STEM fields, and not English or History. It’s not just parents who have openly questioned the workplace value of subjects like literature, philosophy, or the classics. Remember President Obama’s skeptical remark about an art history degree? 
But is it really true that studying the humanities dooms your career prospects? As someone who’s equal parts Wharton MBA and unrepentant Yale humanities geek, with a 30-year career in marketing and brand strategy, I’d argue that business leaders care deeply about what humanities grads have to offer — they just need to understand it in their terms.

	
		
			Advertisement
		
	

	




So, business leaders, this exploration of the value humanities majors can bring to companies is also for you. 

Connecting with customers


  

  
    
      Get Arguable in your inbox:
    

    
        Jeff Jacoby on everything from politics to pet peeves to the passions of the day.

    

  
    

    

    
      
        Sign Up
      
      

    

  

  
    Thank you for signing up!
    Sign up for more newsletters here
    




Ask any CEO what he or she cares about most, and the answer will be immediate: “Our customers.” Business success, after all, hinges on understanding what customers want, how to treat them, and how to meet their future needs. Increasingly fragmented markets create opportunities within ever-smaller customer niches. Opportunities also abound for those who can connect with big, timeless, universal human yearnings. 


Those who study history or fiction or immerse themselves in other cultures develop skills in understanding other lives and worlds — and that understanding can translate into critical business insight. In our tech infatuation, let’s not forget what Steve Jobs said as recently as the iPad 2 launch: “It’s in Apple’s DNA that technology alone is not enough. That it’s technology married with liberal arts, married with the humanities, that yields us the result that makes our hearts sing.”
For a business, seeing the world through the customer’s eyes lies at the heart of successful innovation. As Dev Patnaik wrote in his book “Wired to Care,” “The problem with business today isn’t a lack of innovation; it’s a lack of empathy.” So while companies need data scientists, they also need the “dot connecting” perspective of those who appreciate human beings in all their complexity to analyze, draw conclusions, and take action. 

Addressing complicated business challenges

Are any operating environments getting simpler and more straightforward? 

	
		
			Advertisement
		
	

	




I thought not. 
So businesses need people comfortable with complexity and ambiguity. A linear, instrumental mentality such as knowing protocols to solve specific problems isn’t especially helpful when the problems are big, floppy, interconnected, and changing fast. There are no right/wrong answers when it comes to interpreting an artist’s work or a historical event. 
There are always, however, fresh ways to explore and reframe the issues, illuminate hypotheses, and challenge assumptions. Yes, questioning prevailing assumptions can be both difficult and uncomfortable, but as industries continue to experience the perils (and profits) in disruptive innovation, rethinking accepted tenets grows ever more essential. That’s why the natural skepticism with which humanities majors approach conventional wisdom can be such an asset. 

Investing work with social meaning 

Corporations may not especially care about offering jobs that matter in a societal sense, but Millennials want that kind of employment. And businesses want to attract and keep top young talent. To stay sane, humanities majors will seek meaning in your company and in their roles. My resume says that I doubled market share and restored profitability on the Wisk detergent brand — but I’m prouder that my work created new steady, well-paying manufacturing jobs at the St. Louis plant. Let your history and lit majors loose on the workings of your business, and they’ll find the narratives that make work meaningful. Perfect recruitment fodder.

Increasing intellectual diversity

There aren’t many French majors in the Fortune 500 (trust me, I’ve looked). In business settings, I’m far more often the lone humanities major than the only woman. You’ve already got boatloads of left-brain analytical types, so diversify. Humanities disciplines are the only ones grounded in human-centered right-brain thinking. Hiring a humanities major instead of that next econ grad immediately broadens the range of perspectives at your company. And today, with only 6 percent of students majoring in the humanities, you’re hiring someone who’s already demonstrated some courage and distinction. 

Adding vital skill sets 


	
		
			Advertisement
		
	

	




Humanities majors also offer hard skills, like the ability to write clearly and persuasively. Why, look to the explosive field of medical humanities. Medical students trained in the visual arts develop enhanced observational skills that result in better diagnoses. Teaching narrative medicine and clinical empathy has improved outcomes and reduced the risk of malpractice suits. 
Hmm. So let’s see. Sharper skills, broader perspective, better customer understanding, a greater ability to solve complex challenges, and an enhanced work experience — all by taking advantage of what the humanities have to offer. 
Imagine that, business leaders. 
Actually, don’t just imagine it.
Do yourselves a favor and hire for it.

Tracy Carlson is a consultant, speaker, writer, and the author of What Great Brands Know: Unleash Your Right-Brain to Stand Out and Make Customers Care. She can be reached at tracy@rightbrainbrands.com.

				


	
		
			Loading comments...
			 

	








					
						
			
			
				
 				
	 
		
  
Top 10 Trending Articles

	  
			Viewed
	Commented
	Shared


	  

	  

			
				
					Most Popular in opinion

	
	
		Real journalists. Real journalism. 
		Subscribe to The Boston Globe today.
	



	
			Subscribe Now

	Digital Access
	Home Delivery
	Gift Subscriptions
	My Account

	Manage my Account
	Mobile Customer Service
	Sign Up For Newsletters



			Contact

	Help
	FAQs
	Globe newsroom
	Advertise
	Order back issues



			Social

	Facebook
	Twitter
	Google+



			More

	ePaper
	News in Education
	Archives
	Privacy policy
	Terms of service
	Terms of purchase
	Work at Boston Globe Media


		© 2018 Boston Globe Media Partners, LLC

	






	
		[image: ]
	








		

		
			
			
				
			
		
		
		

		
		
			
		

		
			
		

	
	
	
	
	
	
	








	
		
	
	















	
		
	
	
		
		
		
	




	[image: ]




 











