
        




    


    




    
        
            
              [image: Logo of the American Historical Association]


            
            Skip to content
            
            Show Menu
            
  	  
    AHA Today

	  
    Join

	  
    Donate

	  
    AHA Communities

	  
    MY AHA


	

            
            
                
                
                    
                        Login     
    Login Help

                        
                        
                        
                        
                    

                
                

                

            
                
                    Search
                    
                    
                

            


        

    

	
        
            
                  	
          
    News & Advocacy

          	
          
    AHA Announcements

        
      
	
          
    AHA in the News

        
      
	
          
    Statements and Resolutions of Support and Protest

          	
          
    Guiding Principles on Taking a Public Stance

        
      
	
          
    AHA Procedures for Making Statements on Alleged Violations of Foreign and US Historians Abroad (2001)

        
      
	
          
    Letter to Commerce Secretary on Citizenship Question

        
      
	
          
    Letter from the Coalition for International Education Concerning Title VI and Fulbright-Hays Funding

        
      
	
          
    AHA President Expresses Concerns about Proposed Elimination of the History Major at University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point

        
      
	
          
    AHA President Sends Letter Protesting Access Restrictions to Phillips Library

        
      
	
          
    AHA Condemns Polish Law Criminalizing Public Discussion of Polish Complicity in Nazi War Crimes

        
      
	
          
    Letter from the American Anthropological Association on Banned Words

        
      
	
          
    Statement on Right to Engage in Collective Bargaining

        
      
	
          
    Letter from the Coalition for International Education Supporting Title VI-International Education Programs

        
      
	
          
    Statement Opposing US Proposal to Tax Tuition Waivers

        
      
	
          
    AHA Statement on Confederate Monuments

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Support for Title VI Education

        
      
	
          
    Letter to Archivist of the US Concerning Discontinuing of Saturday Research Room Hours

        
      
	
          
    Statement Protesting Proposed FY18 Budget Reduction of Department of Education

        
      
	
          
    AHA Letter in Support of Central European University

        
      
	
          
    AHA Statement of Protest Regarding Arkansas Howard Zinn Controversy

        
      
	
          
    AHA Protests Detainment of French Historian Henry Rousso

        
      
	
          
    AHA Condemns Second Draft of Executive Travel Ban

        
      
	
          
    AHA Statement of Support for National March for Science

        
      
	
          
    AHA Statement on Right to Nonviolent Political Action

        
      
	
          
    AHA Condemns Executive Order Restricting Entry to the United States

        
      
	
          
    AHA Statement in Aftermath of 2016 Election

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Support for National Monument to Reconstruction

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern to Polish Government regarding Treatment of Historian Jan Gross

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern Regarding Mexican-American Heritage Textbook

        
      
	
          
    Advocacy for Academic Freedom and Institutional Integrity in Turkey

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern Regarding the Port of Los Angeles Archive

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern Regarding Poland's Museum of the Second World War

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Support for Nomination of Dr. Carla Hayden as Librarian of Congress

        
      
	
          
    AHA Signs Memo in Support of Foreign Language and Area Studies Fellowships

        
      
	
          
    Letter Protesting the Persecution of Turkish Scholars

        
      
	
          
    Letter Protesting Potential Closure of Musee des Tissus in Lyon

        
      
	
          
    American Scholarly Societies Joint Statement on Campus Carry Legislation

        
      
	
          
    Public Statement on Oral History and Human Subjects Regulation

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern Regarding the Possible Closure of the Illinois State Museum

        
      
	
          
    Letter Opposing Georgia's Policy Denying Higher Ed Access to Undocumented Students

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern Regarding the Reductions in Resources for the State Historical Society of Iowa

        
      
	
          
    Statement Defending Tenure and Academic Freedom in Wisconsin

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Support for the History of Medicine Division of the National Library of Medicine

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern Regarding Georgia's Religious Freedom Restoration Act

        
      
	
          
    Letter Encouraging Social Studies Funding in ESEA

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern Regarding the Virginia Executive Order for Conflict-of-Interest Reporting

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern Regarding the New York Board of Regents Proposed Modifications to Annual Exams

        
      
	
          
    AHA Commentary on Revision of K-12 History Social Science Framework

        
      
	
          
    Endorsement of Durbin Bill to Expand Student Loan Forgiveness Program to Adjunct Faculty

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern About NHPRC's Requirements Regarding Digital Publication

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern Regarding the Destruction of El Salvadorian Archives

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern to University of Illinois Chancellor Regarding Salaita Case 

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Opposition to Relocation of National Archives for Black Women's History (2014)

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Support for the Federal Records Act Amendments of 2013

        
      
	
          
    Letter to the Board of Education for Jefferson County Colorado Public Schools

        
      
	
          
    Statement of Support for AAUP Opposition to Kansas Board of Regents Social Media Policy

        
      
	
          
    Statement of Support for College Board's Revised Advanced Placement US History Course Framework

        
      
	
          
    Statement of Support for the Council on Graduate Schools' Resolution on Deadlines for Accepting Offers of Admission

        
      
	
          
    AHA Statement on Academic Freedom and the Indiana Governor

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Support for Cuban Scholars to Attend LASA Conference

        
      
	
          
    Statement of Concern about Senate Initiative to Restrict Funding of Political Science Research

        
      
	
          
    Statement of Support for Russian Scholars

        
      
	
          
    Statement of Concern about Texas State Board of Education Amendments

        
      
	
          
    Resolution Regarding the 2010 AHA Annual Meeting

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern about Russian Raid on Human Rights Organization

        
      
	
          
    AHA Council Endorses the National Council for History Education's Statement on Teacher Qualifications

        
      
	
          
    AHA Supports Adding History to No Child Left Behind Act

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern about Jaywalking Arrest

        
      
	
          
    Resolution on United States Government Practices Inimical to the Values of the Historical Profession

        
      
	
          
    Resolution Opposing the Use of "Free Speech Zones" to Restrict Academic Freedom

        
      
	
          
    Support for Middle East Studies Association's Protest of the Detention of Scholars in Iran

        
      
	
          
    Letter of Concern about Denial of Visa to Georgetown University PhD from Bolivia

        
      
	
          
    AHA Statement on the 2006 Florida Education Bill

        
      
	
          
    Resolution on the United States Government's Abusive Policies toward Foreign Prisoners

        
      
	
          
    Resolution Opposing Academic and Student Bills of Rights

        
      
	
          
    Protest to Secretary of State Colin Powell over Rejection of Cuban Scholars' Visa Applications

        
      
	
          
    Resolution on Part-Time and Adjunct Employees

        
      
	
          
    Resolution on the Michael Bellesiles Case

        
      
	
          
    Resolution on the Smithsonian Institution

        
      
	
          
    Resolution on Funding for the National Historical Publications and Records Commission

        
      



      
	
          
    Historians Making News

          	
          
    Placeholder component

        
      
	
          
    More News

        
      



      
	
          
    AHA Today

        
      
	
          
    Everything Has a History

          	
          
    Historians on the Confederate Monument Debate

        
      
	
          
    Everything Has a History Video Library

        
      
	
          
    America Inside Out Welcome Page

        
      



      
	
          
    Coalitions

          	
          
    Advocacy with COSSA

        
      
	
          
    Advocacy with the National Coalition for History

        
      
	
          
    Advocacy with the National Humanities Alliance

        
      



      
	
          
    Calendar

          	
          
    Add a Calendar Item

        
      
	
          
    Calendar Item Details

        
      



      
	
          
    News Archives

          	
          
    All News 2018

        
      
	
          
    All News 2017

        
      
	
          
    All News 2016

        
      
	
          
    All News 2015

        
      
	
          
    AHA Announcements 2018

        
      
	
          
    AHA Announcements 2017

        
      
	
          
    AHA Announcements 2016

        
      
	
          
    Historians Making News 2018

        
      
	
          
    Historians Making News 2017

        
      
	
          
    Historians Making News 2016

        
      
	
          
    Historians Making News 2015

        
      



      



      
	
          
    Publications & Directories

          	
          
    American Historical Review

        
      
	
          
    Perspectives on History

          	
          
    Submissions

        
      
	
          
    Search Past Issues

        
      
	
          
    Mobile Perspectives on History

        
      
	
          
    Perspectives on History Staff

        
      



      
	
          
    AHA Today

          	
          
    AHA Today Blog_RSS

        
      



      
	
          
    Publications Orders for Members

        
      
	
          
    Publications Orders for Nonmembers

        
      
	
          
    Directories

          	
          
    Listing in the Directory

        
      
	
          
    Directory of History Departments

        
      
	
          
    Directory of Doctoral Programs

        
      
	
          
    Directory of Dissertations

        
      
	
          
    Directory of Journals

        
      



      
	
          
    Archives Wiki

        
      
	
          
    Subscriptions

        
      
	
          
    Commenting Policy

        
      
	
          
    Advertising

          	
          
    Mailing Lists

        
      



      
	
          
    Permissions 

        
      



      
	
          
    Teaching & Learning

          	
          
    Why Study History?

          	
          
    Questionnaire: Why Study History?

        
      



      
	
          
    Teaching Resources for Historians

          	
          
    Classroom Materials

        
      
	
          
    Approaches to Teaching

        
      
	
          
    Teaching with DigHist

        
      
	
          
    Resources for Globalizing the US History Survey

        
      
	
          
    Resources for Tuning the History Discipline

        
      
	
          
    The Decision to Secede and Establish the Confederacy: A Selection of Primary Sources

        
      
	
          
    Plagiarism: Curricular Materials for History Instructors

        
      
	
          
    How to Detect and Demonstrate Plagiarism

        
      
	
          
    Teaching and Learning in the Digital Age

        
      
	
          
    Sixteen Months to Sumter

        
      
	
          
    National History Center Mock Policy Briefing Program

        
      
	
          
    Reacting to the Past

        
      



      
	
          
    Globalizing the US History Survey

          	
          
    About Bridging Cultures

        
      



      
	
          
    Tuning the History Discipline

          	
          
    About Tuning

        
      
	
          
    Past Events

        
      
	
          
    2016 History Discipline Core

        
      
	
          
    2013 History Discipline Core

        
      
	
          
    Tuning Participants

        
      



      
	
          
    Future of the African American Past Video Resources

        
      
	
          
    Digital History Resources

          	
          
    Resources for Getting Started in Digital History

        
      
	
          
    Evaluation of Digital Scholarship in History

        
      
	
          
    Digital Primary Sources

        
      



      
	
          
    Extending the Reach of Scholarly Society Work to HBCU Faculty

        
      



      
	
          
    Jobs & Professional Development

          	
          
    AHA Career Center

        
      
	
          
    Post a Job

        
      
	
          
    Career Diversity for Historians

          	
          
    About Career Diversity

        
      
	
          
    Career Diversity Resources

        
      
	
          
    Career Diversity in Perspectives and AHA Today

        
      
	
          
    Career Diversity Implementation Grants

        
      



      
	
          
    Career Resources

          	
          
    Careers for History Majors

        
      
	
          
    Careers for Students of History

        
      
	
          
    Careers in Public History

        
      
	
          
    Data on the History Profession

        
      
	
          
    Resources for Job Candidates and Search Committees

        
      
	
          
    Why Become a Historian?

        
      
	
          
    Are You Thinking of a Career in Secondary Schools?

        
      
	
          
    An Option Worth Pursuing: Teaching Opportunities for History Graduate Students in Secondary Schools

        
      



      
	
          
    Professional Life

          


      
	
          
    Mentoring

          	
          
    Disability Mentorship Program

        
      



      
	
          
    Statements, Standards, and Guidelines of the Discipline

          	
          
    Statement on Standards of Professional Conduct

        
      
	
          
    Best Practices on Spousal/Partner Hiring

        
      
	
          
    Guidelines for the Hiring Process

        
      
	
          
    Standards for Museum Exhibits Dealing with Historical Subjects

        
      
	
          
    Statement on Age Discrimination

        
      
	
          
    Statement on Diversity and Affirmative Action

        
      
	
          
    Statement on Excellent Classroom Teaching of History

        
      
	
          
    Statement on Right to Engage in Collective Bargaining

        
      
	
          
    Tenure, Promotion, and the Publicly Engaged Academic Historian

        
      
	
          
    Guidelines for the Doctoral Dissertation Process (2016)

        
      
	
          
    Guidelines for the Preparation of Teachers of History (2016)

        
      
	
          
    Best Practices for Accessible Publishing (2016)

        
      
	
          
    Statement of Support for Academic Freedom (2016)

        
      
	
          
    Statement on Dual Enrollment/Concurrent Enrollment (2016)

        
      
	
          
    Guidelines on the Professional Evaluation of Digital Scholarship by Historians (2015)

        
      
	
          
    Statement on Graduate School Offers of Financial Support (2014)

        
      
	
          
    Statement on Policies Regarding the Option to Embargo Completed History PhD Dissertations

        
      
	
          
    Statement on Productivity

        
      
	
          
    Statement on Scholarly Journal Publishing

        
      
	
          
    When Academic Departments Merge: First Principles, Best Practices

        
      
	
          
    Telephone and Video Interviews for Academic Hiring: Some Guidelines

        
      
	
          
    Best Practices on Transparency in Placement Records

        
      
	
          
    Standards for Part-Time, Adjunct and Contingent Faculty (2011)

        
      
	
          
    Equity for Minority Historians in the Academic History Workplace: A Guide to Best Practices

        
      
	
          
    Guidelines for Job Offers in History

        
      
	
          
    Statement on Peer Review for Historical Research

        
      
	
          
    Statement on Oral History and Institutional Review Boards

        
      
	
          
    Benchmarks for Professional Development

        
      
	
          
    Criteria for Standards in History/Social Studies/Social Sciences

        
      
	
          
    Guidelines for the Preparation, Evaluation, and Selection of History Textbooks

        
      



      
	
          
    Meetings & Seminars Calendar

        
      



      
	
          
    Annual Meeting

          	
          
    Program

        
      
	
          
    Sponsors & Exhibits

          	
          
    Sponsorship Opportunities

        
      



      
	
          
    Dates & Deadlines

        
      
	
          
    Registration

          	
          
    Refund Policy

        
      
	
          
    Logos for Participant Use

        
      



      
	
          
    Hotels and Travel

          	
          
    Information for International Participants

        
      



      
	
          
    Job Center and Career Fair

          	
          
    Career Fair

        
      
	
          
    Job Center

        
      
	
          
    Recommendations for Interviews in Non-Job Center Facilities

        
      



      
	
          
    Resources and Guides

          


      
	
          
    Business Meeting

          


      
	
          
    Future Meetings

          	
          
    Submit a Proposal

        
      



      
	
          
    Past Meetings

          	
          
    Past Meetings Archive

        
      



      
	
          
    Affiliated Societies at the Annual Meeting

          	
          
    Process for Affiliate Sessions and Events

        
      
	
          
    Instructions for Affiliate Sessions and Events

        
      



      



      
	
          
    Awards & Grants

          	
          
    Awards & Prizes

          	
          
    Herbert Baxter Adams Prize

        
      
	
          
    Troyer Steele Anderson Prize

        
      
	
          
    Eugene Asher Award

        
      
	
          
    George Louis Beer Prize

        
      
	
          
    Jerry Bentley Prize

        
      
	
          
    Albert J. Beveridge Award

        
      
	
          
    Beveridge Family Teaching Prize

        
      
	
          
    Paul Birdsall Prize

        
      
	
          
    James Henry Breasted Prize

        
      
	
          
    Albert B. Corey Prize

        
      
	
          
    Raymond J. Cunningham Prize

        
      
	
          
    John H. Dunning Prize

        
      
	
          
    Equity Award

        
      
	
          
    John K. Fairbank Prize

        
      
	
          
    Herbert Feis Award

        
      
	
          
    Morris D. Forkosch Prize

        
      
	
          
    Leo Gershoy Award

        
      
	
          
    William and Edwyna Gilbert Award

        
      
	
          
    Clarence H. Haring Prize

        
      
	
          
    Honorary Foreign Member

        
      
	
          
    J. Franklin Jameson Award

        
      
	
          
    Friedrich Katz Prize

        
      
	
          
    Joan Kelly Memorial Prize

        
      
	
          
    Martin A. Klein Prize

        
      
	
          
    Waldo G. Leland Prize

        
      
	
          
    Littleton-Griswold Prize

        
      
	
          
    J. Russell Major Prize

        
      
	
          
    Helen & Howard R. Marraro Prize

        
      
	
          
    George L. Mosse Prize

        
      
	
          
    John E. O'Connor Film Award

        
      
	
          
    Eugenia M. Palmegiano Prize 

        
      
	
          
    James A. Rawley Prize

        
      
	
          
    Premio del Rey

        
      
	
          
    John F. Richards Prize

        
      
	
          
    James Harvey Robinson Prize

        
      
	
          
    Nancy Lyman Roelker Mentorship Award

        
      
	
          
    Dorothy Rosenberg Prize

        
      
	
          
    Award for Scholarly Distinction

        
      
	
          
    Theodore Roosevelt-Woodrow Wilson Award

        
      
	
          
    Roy Rosenzweig Prize

        
      
	
          
    Wesley-Logan Prize

        
      



      
	
          
    Grants & Fellowships

          	
          
    Albert J. Beveridge Grant

        
      
	
          
    Michael Kraus Research Grant

        
      
	
          
    Littleton-Griswold Research Grant

        
      
	
          
    Bernadotte E. Schmitt Grant

        
      
	
          
    J. Franklin Jameson Fellowship

        
      
	
          
    Fellowships in Aerospace History

        
      



      
	
          
    Past Recipients

          	
          
    Herbert Baxter Adams Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    AHA Council Annual Meeting Travel Grant Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Troyer Steele Anderson Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Eugene Asher Award Recipients

        
      
	
          
    George Louis Beer Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Jerry Bentley Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Jerry Bentley World History Travel Grant Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Beveridge Family Teaching Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Albert J. Beveridge Award Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Albert J. Beveridge Grant Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Paul Birdsall Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    James Henry Breasted Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Albert B. Corey Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Raymond J. Cunningham Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    John H. Dunning Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Equity Award Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Extraordinary Service Award Recipients

        
      
	
          
    John E. Fagg Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    John K. Fairbank Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Herbert Feis Award Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Morris D. Forkosch Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Leo Gershoy Award Recipients

        
      
	
          
    William and Edwyna Gilbert Award Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Gutenberg-e Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Clarence H. Haring Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Honorary Foreign Member Recipients

        
      
	
          
    J. Franklin Jameson Award Recipients

        
      
	
          
    J. Franklin Jameson Fellowship Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Friedrich Katz Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Joan Kelly Memorial Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Martin A. Klein Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Michael Kraus Research Grant Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Waldo G. Leland Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Littleton-Griswold Grant Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Littleton-Griswold Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    J. Russell Major Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Helen & Howard R. Marraro Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    George L. Mosse Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Fellowship in Aerospace History Recipients

        
      
	
          
    John E. O'Connor Film Award Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Eugenia M. Palmegiano Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    James A. Rawley Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Premio del Rey Recipients

        
      
	
          
    John F. Richards Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    James Harvey Robinson Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Nancy Lyman Roelker Mentorship Award Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Theodore Roosevelt-Woodrow Wilson Award Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Dorothy Rosenberg Phi Beta Kappa Travel Grant Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Dorothy Rosenberg Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Roy Rosenzweig Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Bernadotte Schmitt Grant Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Award for Scholarly Distinction Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Wesley-Logan Prize Recipients

        
      
	
          
    Discontinued Awards

        
      



      
	
          
    Awards & Fellowships Calendar

        
      



      
	
          
    About AHA & Membership

          	
          
    About Us

        
      
	
          
    Membership

          	
          
    Why Join the AHA?

        
      
	
          
    Member Benefits

        
      
	
          
    Individual Member Rates

        
      
	
          
    Institutional Membership

        
      
	
          
    Login Help

        
      



      
	
          
    Donate

          	
          
    Contributing and Life Members

        
      
	
          
    Donors to the Association, July 1, 2016-June 30, 2017

        
      
	
          
    Donors to the Association, July 1, 2015-June 30, 2016

        
      
	
          
    Donors to the Association, July 1, 2014-June 30, 2015

        
      
	
          
    Donors to the Association, July 1, 2013-June 30, 2014

        
      
	
          
    Donors to the Association, July 1, 2012-June 30, 2013

        
      
	
          
    Donors to the Association, July 1, 2011-June 30, 2012

        
      



      
	
          
    Governance

          	
          
    Council

        
      
	
          
    Divisions

        
      
	
          
    Committees

        
      
	
          
    Pacific Coast Branch

        
      
	
          
    Constitution and Bylaws

        
      
	
          
    Policies and Documents of the Association

        
      
	
          
    Reports of Committees and Divisions

        
      



      
	
          
    Affiliated Societies

          	
          
    Affiliated Society Meetings

        
      



      
	
          
    AHA History and Archives

          	
          
    Brief History of the AHA

        
      
	
          
    Annual Reports

        
      
	
          
    Historical Archives

        
      
	
          
    Presidential Addresses

        
      
	
          
    GI Roundtable Series

        
      



      
	
          
    FAQ

        
      
	
          
    AHA Staff

          	
          
    Job Openings at the AHA

        
      
	
          
    Intern for the American Historical Association

        
      



      
	
          
    Sign Up to Learn More about AHA

        
      



      



            

        


    




    
        
        
              
    AHA
   
  
    Teaching & Learning
  
    Digital History Resources
  
    Evaluation of Digital Scholarship in History
  
    Guidelines for the Professional Evaluation of Digital Scholarship by Historians
        

        

        
        
                            Guidelines for the Professional Evaluation of Digital Scholarship by Historians

                            
                    



Download the Guidelines (PDF)

Defining the Challenge

The context of historical scholarship is changing rapidly and profoundly. Disciplines and universities that emerged two centuries ago in a profusion of print now find themselves confronted with new digital forms. The historical discipline needs to address, directly and frankly, its particular disciplinary position at this historical juncture.

Historical scholarship is, of course, already digital in many ways. Historians conduct research in digital libraries, use digital tools in their teaching, and participate in conversations on digital networks. Many colleges and universities have created centers and laboratories to foster digital innovation across the disciplines. New forms of scholarship and teaching are now taking shape and contributing to our understanding of the past. These forms of scholarship, in the judgement of the AHA, are no less deserving of professional evaluation than print scholarship.

Despite this ferment, broadly accepted guidelines for the professional evaluation of digital scholarship have not yet emerged. Digital innovation receives widely varying levels of formal recognition when scholars are hired or evaluated for tenure or promotion. That disconnect between emerging practice and the evaluation of that practice discourages scholars at all levels from engaging with the new capacities. It also prevents the profession, and the departments in which it is grounded, from creatively confronting ways in which historical knowledge increasingly will be created and communicated.

The American Historical Association has established this committee to help ensure that our profession acts in far-sighted ways as the digital presence grows. Most concretely, it seeks to help clarify the policies associated with the evaluation of scholarly work in digital forms. More broadly, the goal of the Association and of the committee is to align our best traditions with our best opportunities.

Because academic contributions in the emergent digital environment can take many forms, the AHA has asked the committee to examine not only “work that can be seen as analogous to print scholarship that is reviewable by peers (i.e. journal articles and books), but also to address the myriad uses of digital technology for research, teaching, pedagogy, and even some that might be described as service.”

The AHA offers “a broad working definition of digital history” as “scholarship that is either produced using computational tools and methods or presented using digital technologies.” That definition will embrace a steadily growing proportion of historical scholarship in coming years, and so it is important that departments, chairs, and committees develop a clear understanding of these developments.

At its heart, scholarship is a documented and disciplined conversation about matters of enduring consequence. Hiring, tenure, and promotion involve peer-based judgments evaluating the significance of a scholar’s contribution to one or more of those conversations. Because scholarship is always evolving, departments should continually adapt their policies and practices to take advantage of new opportunities. In the same ways that historians have broadened their expertise to embrace many new subfields over the last several decades, so we must expand our understanding of the rapidly evolving digital environment to take advantage of the possibilities and opportunities it presents.

Forms and Functions of Digital Scholarship

Digital scholarship takes many forms and so will departments’ judgments regarding that work. Some digital publication can be very nearly indistinguishable from print publication in every respect but its medium. A high-quality, peer-reviewed journal article or long-form manuscript published only in digital form is the equivalent of a similar publication printed on paper. Historians whose expressive and methodological practices differ very little from print-era scholars should carry no special burden for explaining why their work appears in digital form save to provide basic information about practices of peer review, editorial control, and circulation that any scholar might be asked to supply about any publication during an evaluation process.

Other digital publication, by contrast, uses methodologies, argumentation, and archival practices that differ from print practices. For those historians, an interest in digital media and tools often stems from a more substantial shift in the methodologies they use to work with archival evidence, oral testimony, or other source material. They may turn to digital media primarily for its potential to support a communicative transformation, providing new ways to connect the professional work of expert historical scholarship with the ways in which wider publics memorialize, represent, and engage history.

Digital history in various forms often represents a commitment to expanding what history is, and can do, as a field, as well as the audiences that it addresses. Historians who take a strong interest in digital media and information technology, or who choose to work exclusively in digital environments, should be evaluated in terms of their overall ability to use sustained, expressive, substantive, and institutional innovation to advance scholarship. This is a commitment that is scholarly in some instances, pedagogical in others, or represents a collegial commitment to the discipline of history.

Some scholars seek to incubate genuinely new approaches to historical reasoning. Those strategies might include new digital short-form genres such as blogs, social media or multimedia storytelling, developing and using new pedagogical methods, participating in strong activist forms of open-access distribution of scholarly work, or creating digital platforms and tools as alternative modalities of scholarly production.

Wherever possible, historians should be ready to explore and consider new modes and forms of intellectual work within the discipline and to expand their understanding of what constitutes the discipline accordingly. The shared commitment of all historians to the informed and evidence-based conversation that is history can smooth our discipline’s integration of new possibilities. With agreement on the purpose of our work, new and varying forms of that work can be seen as strengths rather than impediments.

Roles and Responsibilities

Work done by historians using digital methodologies or media for research, pedagogy, or communication should be evaluated for hiring, promotion, and tenure on its scholarly merit and the contribution that work makes to the discipline through research, teaching, or service. Any search or promotion process that is described as open to or requiring digitally based scholarship needs to embrace at a fundamental level the possible, even the probable, appearance of highly qualified candidates whose preferred practice of digital history significantly challenges print, and perhaps other forms of disciplinary orthodoxy.

Even departments not explicitly hiring a digital historian need to reckon with digital engagement in the discipline and to be prepared to face the challenges and take advantage of the opportunities it provides. For their part, scholars who embark upon digital scholarship have a responsibility to be as clear as possible at each stage of conceiving, building, and sharing that scholarship about the implications and significance of using the digital medium for their contribution to the scholarly conversation. Historians whose use of information technology produces new methodological capacities and modes of analysis need to provide explanatory narratives as a prelude to the professional evaluation of their scholarship by disciplinary colleagues.

Accordingly these guidelines make recommendations for departments, for individual digital historians, and finally for how the AHA can help to promote digital scholarship in the discipline.

Responsibilities of Departments

Departments of history should ask themselves the following questions:

	How are your department and your institution responding to the opportunities and challenges presented by the emerging digital environment?
	How is your department planning to evaluate work presented as part of hiring, promotion, tenure, or other review in a digital medium?
	Do your hiring plans include positions that involve research, teaching, and scholarly communication employing the use of digital media?


After these initial conversations, the AHA recommends that departments explore their situation more deeply. The AHA recognizes that most departments will not be able to address all the following points immediately. One approach would be to form a committee to address the issues, another would be to start addressing them in the course of their regular meetings, and this process may take some time. But given the likelihood that most departments will eventually face the question of how to evaluate digital work, and to integrate such work into its spectrum of activities, consideration of these issues should begin before actual cases present themselves.

	They should inform themselves about developments in the digital context of our work. Most colleges and universities have staff in place whose job it is to monitor and promote new technologies. Librarians, in particular, have long been involved in professional conversations regarding new technologies of teaching and scholarship. Many of them will be delighted to hold workshops and address faculty in groups or as individuals.
	Before hiring and encouraging fellow historians who have responsibility for fostering these capacities, it is advisable that chairs and committee heads specify what will count as scholarly contributions toward tenure and promotion. Departments should review and revise written guidelines that define the expectations of ways that colleagues might use digital resources, tools, and networks in their scholarship.
	Digital scholarship should be evaluated in its native digital medium, not printed out for inclusion in review materials. Evaluators need to understand how a project works, what capacities it possesses, and how well those capacities perform. This can only be done by actually using the interface.
	Departments should consider how to evaluate as scholarship the development of sophisticated digital tools.
	Departments need to consider how they will deal with work in a digital medium that exists in a process of continual revision, and therefore never exists as a “finished” product.
	Since digital scholarship often includes collaborations, departments should consider developing protocols for evaluating collaborative work, such as co-authored works, undergraduate research, crowdsourcing, and development of tools.
	The development of tools and other significant methodological contributions to digital scholarship often require funding to enable collaborations within and across disciplines. Since obtaining funding of this kind may involve undergoing a rigorous peer-review process, departments should consider how to evaluate a candidate’s record of successful grant proposals of this kind.
	Departments without expertise in digital scholarship should consider enlisting colleagues who possess expertise in particular forms of digital scholarship to help them evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the work before them.


Responsibilities of Scholars

Individual scholars doing digital work in history will need to consider their own set of questions:

	How would you explain your use of digital means to accomplish your scholarly goals and the commitment of time and energy you will invest in that work?
	How will your department and institution support and evaluate digital scholarship?
	What are your plans for dissemination, sustainability, and preservation?


Once you have answered these questions, the AHA recommends the following:

	Before initiating a digital project and throughout the course of the project, you should be prepared to explain and document its development and progress and its contributions to scholarship. These statements should be discussed with chairs and committee heads to make sure everyone is operating with the same expectations.
	Seek support and guidance in preparing your promotion or tenure portfolio. Resources maintained by departments, the AHA, and scholars can provide important help in crafting your case for the scholarly value of your digital work.
	Bring colleagues into your project, taking advantage of opportunities to explain how your work contributes to the scholarly conversation in on-campus forums, professional meetings, and print or online publications. If you establish collaborations and alliances, make sure your department and institution are fully informed at each step.
	Consider how the processes and procedures by which your department and institution evaluate and support digital scholarship and teaching will have on your plans.
	You should be clear at each step about the expectations of deadlines, final products, and evaluation. Historians who are experimenting with new forms need to be especially clear about what they are doing, what opportunities it offers, what challenges their work presents to their colleagues, and the impact of their work on the intended audiences.


The American Historical Association’s Role

The AHA has long sought to advance the possibilities for scholarship in all forms. Over the last two decades, a series of presidents has focused on the opportunities afforded by digital tools and networks, the organization’s Perspectives on History has featured projects and overviews, the American Historical Review has experimented with articles that contain digital components and added reviews of digital scholarship, and the annual meeting has featured venues for the presentation and discussion of digital history.

Building on this work, the AHA will increase its advocacy on several related fronts. The first step is this committee itself, which will work collaboratively with departments to help clarify just what needs to be done and why.

The committee further recommends that:

	The AHA gather historians experienced in digital scholarship into a working group that will keep itself informed of developments in the field and maintain a directory of historians qualified to assist departments looking for expert outside reviewers for candidates at times of tenure and promotion.
	The AHA consider this working group as a resource that could also help to foster conversations using AHA Communities, and produce regular pieces for the AHA’s blog AHA Today, and Perspectives on History related to digital scholarship.
	The AHA sustain a curated gallery of ongoing digital scholarship so that historians can learn directly from one another as they conceive, build, and interpret new forms of scholarship.
	The editor of the American Historical Review consider implementing more regular reviews of digital scholarship, means for featuring digital projects, and peer review of those projects.


                

                                

        
        
    
            Digital History Working Group

        
            The AHA is establishing a Digital History Working Group that will be available to advise departments on issues raised by the guidelines, help them define their own guidelines, and recommend external reviewers. Members of the working group include:

	David Bell, Princeton (co-chair, ex officio)
	Kalani Craig, Indiana Univ.
	Paula Findlen, Stanford Univ.
	Walter Hawthorne, Michigan State Univ.
	Jason Kelly, IUPUI
	Andrew H. Lee, NYU
	Jeff McClurken, Univ. of Mary Washington (co-chair)
	Michelle Moravec, Rosemont College
	Stephen Robertson, George Mason Univ.


If you wish to contact the working group, please email Seth Denbo, who will connect you with the right person.

        

                
        Meet the DH Working Group

    

    
    
            Japanese Translation of the Guidelines

        
            In February of 2016, the Japanese Association for Digital Humanities released a Japanese translation of the Guidelines for the Professional Evaluation of Digital Scholarship by Historians.

        

                
        View the translation on JADH

    

    
        

        
    






    
        

            
                
                
                    AHA Site Map

                    
  
    News & Advocacy
  
    Publications & Directories
  
    Teaching & Learning
  
    Jobs & Professional Development
  
    Annual Meeting
  
    Awards & Grants
  
    About AHA & Membership
                              
    Full Site Map

                    

                


                
                    Get Involved

  
    Why should I join the AHA?
  
    How can I support the AHA?

                

                
                
                    Connect

                    
    [image: ]

    [image: ]

    [image: ]

    [image: ]

    [image: ]

                    

                
                

                
                    Contact

                    
                        400 A St. SE, Washington DC 20003
Directions >

Phone: 202.544.2422
Fax: 202.544.8307
Email: info@historians.org

                        © 2017 American Historical Association

                    

                


            


        

    



        




    
 
    