
    
    

    
        
            
                
                    NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please upgrade your browser.
                    LEARN MORE »
                
            

        

    




    
    
    
        
            Sections
            
                Home
            
            Search
            Skip to content
                        Skip to navigation
                                    View mobile version
                    

        
            
                
                    The New York Times
                
            

            
        

                
            Books|In 500 Billion Words, New Window on Culture

        

        
            



            





            Search
            
                Subscribe Now
                Log In
                                                0
                Settings
            

        

    

    
    Close search
    
    Site Search Navigation

    
        
            
                                Search NYTimes.com
                            

            
                                
                
                Clear this text input
                
                    

                

                Go
            

        

    






    


            
    
        	
                Loading...

            


        
            
                See next articles
                
                    

                

            
            
                See previous articles
                
                    

                

            
        

    




        
    Site Navigation




    Site Mobile Navigation



    

    
        
    
    Advertisement






        
        

    


                        
    
                                
                            
                    Supported by
                    

                

                                        
                                                                                            Books
                                                                            |                            Humanities 2.0                                                            

                        			In 500 Billion Words, New Window on Culture

	                                                
                                                                                                    

By PATRICIA COHENDEC. 16, 2010



                                    
                        
Continue reading the main story
Share This Page

Continue reading the main story




                                                                                                

                                            

        

    

    

        
    
    
        With little fanfare, Google has made a mammoth database culled from nearly 5.2 million digitized books available to the public for free downloads and online searches, opening a new landscape of possibilities for research and education in the humanities.
The digital storehouse, which comprises words and short phrases as well as a year-by-year count of how often they appear, represents the first time a data set of this magnitude and searching tools are at the disposal of Ph.D.’s, middle school students and anyone else who likes to spend time in front of a small screen. It consists of the 500 billion words contained in books published between 1500 and 2008 in English, French, Spanish, German, Chinese and Russian.
The intended audience is scholarly, but a simple online tool allows anyone with a computer to plug in a string of up to five words and see a graph that charts the phrase’s use over time — a diversion that can quickly become as addictive as the habit-forming game Angry Birds.
With a click you can see that “women,” in comparison with “men,” is rarely mentioned until the early 1970s, when feminism gained a foothold. The lines eventually cross paths about 1986.

    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story


You can also learn that Mickey Mouse and Marilyn Monroe don’t get nearly as much attention in print as Jimmy Carter; compare the many more references in English than in Chinese to “Tiananmen Square” after 1989; or follow the ascent of “grilling” from the late 1990s until it outpaced “roasting” and “frying” in 2004.
        Continue reading the main story
    

    
    




    
    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story
    






    
        “The goal is to give an 8-year-old the ability to browse cultural trends throughout history, as recorded in books,” said Erez Lieberman Aiden, a junior fellow at the Society of Fellows at Harvard. Mr. Lieberman Aiden and Jean-Baptiste Michel, a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard, assembled the data set with Google and spearheaded a research project to demonstrate how vast digital databases can transform our understanding of language, culture and the flow of ideas.
Their study, to be published in the journal Science on Friday, offers a tantalizing taste of the rich buffet of research opportunities now open to literature, history and other liberal arts professors who may have previously avoided quantitative analysis. Science is taking the unusual step of making the paper available online to nonsubscribers.
“We wanted to show what becomes possible when you apply very high-turbo data analysis to questions in the humanities,” said Mr. Lieberman Aiden, whose expertise is in applied mathematics and genomics. He called the method “culturomics.”

    Photo
    
            [image: ]
            




Jean-Baptiste Michel and Erez Lieberman are co-authors of a Science paper coming about “culturomics.”
                        
            Credit
            Kris Snibbe/Harvard University        
            
    
The data set can be downloaded, and users can build their own search tools.
Working with a version of the data set that included Hebrew and started in 1800, the researchers measured the endurance of fame, finding that written references to celebrities faded twice as quickly in the mid-20th century as they did in the early 19th. “In the future everyone will be famous for 7.5 minutes,” they write.
Looking at inventions, they found technological advances took, on average, 66 years to be adopted by the larger culture in the early 1800s and only 27 years between 1880 and 1920.
They tracked the way eccentric English verbs that did not add “ed” at the end for past tense (i.e., “learnt”) evolved to conform to the common pattern (“learned”). They figured that the English lexicon has grown by 70 percent to more than a million words in the last 50 years and they demonstrated how dictionaries could be updated more rapidly by pinpointing newly popular words and obsolete ones.
Steven Pinker, a linguist at Harvard who collaborated on the Science paper’s section about language evolution, has been studying changes in grammar and past tense forms for 20 years.

    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story


“When I saw they had this database, I was quite energized,” he said. “There is so much ignorance. We’ve had to speculate what might have happened to the language.”
The information about verb changes “makes the results more convincing and more complete,” Mr. Pinker added. “What we report in this paper is just the beginning.”

    Newsletter Sign Up

    Continue reading the main story
        
        
    
    
        
            
                Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.

                Invalid email address. Please re-enter.

                You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.

            

            
                
                Sign Up
            

        

        
            
                
            

            
                You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.
            

        

        

    

    
        Thank you for subscribing.

        An error has occurred. Please try again later.

        You are already subscribed to this email.

        View all New York Times newsletters.

    

    	See Sample
	Manage Email Preferences
	Not you?
	Privacy Policy
	Opt out or contact us anytime


    




Despite the frequent resistance to quantitative analysis in some corners of the humanities, Mr. Pinker said he was confident that the use of this and similar tools would “become universal.”
Reactions from humanities scholars who quickly reviewed the article were more muted. “In general it’s a great thing to have,” Louis Menand, an English professor at Harvard, said, particularly for linguists. But he warned that in the realm of cultural history, “obviously some of the claims are a little exaggerated.” He was also troubled that, among the paper’s 13 named authors, there was not a single humanist involved.
“There’s not even a historian of the book connected to the project,” Mr. Menand noted.
Alan Brinkley, the former provost at Columbia and a professor of American history, said it was too early to tell what the impact of word and phrase searches would be. “I could imagine lots of interesting uses, I just don’t know enough about what they’re trying to do statistically,” he said.

    Photo
    
            [image: ]
            

            Credit
            The New York Times        
            
    
Aware of concerns raised by humanists that the essence of their art is a search for meaning, Mr. Michel and Mr. Lieberman Aiden emphasized that culturomics simply provided information. Interpretation remains essential.
“I don’t want humanists to accept any specific claims — we’re just throwing a lot of interesting pieces on the table,” Mr. Lieberman Aiden said. “The question is: Are you willing to examine this data?”
Mr. Michel and Mr. Lieberman Aiden first started their research in 2004 on irregular verbs. Google Books did not exist then, and they had to scrutinize stacks of Anglo-Saxon texts page by page. The process took 18 months.
“We were exhausted,” Mr. Lieberman Aiden said. That painstaking work “was a total Hail Mary pass; we could have collected this data set and proved nothing.”

    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story


Then they read about Google’s plan to create a digital library and store of every book ever published and recognized that it could revolutionize their research. They approached Peter Norvig, the director of research at Google, about using the collection to do statistical analyses.
“He realized this was a great opportunity for science and for Google,” Mr. Michel said. “We spent the next four years dealing with the many, many complicated issues that arose,” including legal complications and computational constraints. (A proposed class-action settlement pertaining to copyright and compensation brought by writers and publishers as a result of Google’s digitization plans is pending in the courts.) Google says the culturomics project raises no copyright issue because the books themselves, or even sections of them, cannot be read.
So far, Google has scanned more than 11 percent of the entire corpus of published books, about two trillion words. The data analyzed in the paper contains about 4 percent of the corpus.
The warehouse of words makes it possible to analyze cultural influences statistically in a way previously not possible. Cultural references tend to appear in print much less frequently than everyday words, said Mr. Michel, whose expertise is in applied math and systems biology. An accurate picture needs a huge sample. Checking if “sasquatch” has infiltrated the culture requires a supply of at least a billion words a year, he said.
As for culturomics? In 20 years, type the word into an updated version of the database and see what happens.

    
                Humanities 2.0: 
Articles in this series examine
how digital tools are changing
scholarship in history, literature
and the arts.


        
        
        A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2010, on Page A3 of the New York edition with the headline: HUMANITIES 2.0; In 500 Billion Words, New Window on Culture.   Order Reprints|  Today's Paper|Subscribe




    

    
        Continue reading the main story
    
    
    



    
    

    We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.





    
        
    
    
                
            Related Coverage

        
        	
    

                    
                [image: ]
                

            

        
        
                            HUMANITIES 2.0 

                        
                Victorian Literature, Statistically Analyzed With New Process
                                    DEC. 3, 2010
                                            

        

    




    





    
    

    	
	
	
	





    




    
        Related Coverage

    
    
        	
    
        
                            HUMANITIES 2.0 

                        
                Victorian Literature, Statistically Analyzed With New Process
                                    DEC. 3, 2010
                                            

        


                    
                [image: ]
                

            

            




            






    What's Next

    
        
            Loading...

        

    






           
 



                    

            
            
    
        Go to Home Page »

        
            Site Index
            
                The New York Times
            
        

        
    

    
        Site Index Navigation

        

                                                        
                    
                        News

                        	
                                        World
                                    
	
                                        U.S.
                                    
	
                                        Politics
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.
                                    
	
                                        Business
                                    
	
                                        Tech
                                    
	
                                        Science
                                    
	
                                        Health
                                    
	
                                        Sports
                                    
	
                                        Education
                                    
	
                                        Obituaries
                                    
	
                                        Today's Paper
                                    
	
                                        Corrections
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Opinion

                        	
                                        Today's Opinion
                                    
	
                                        Op-Ed Columnists
                                    
	
                                        Editorials
                                    
	
                                        Op-Ed Contributors
                                    
	
                                        Letters
                                    
	
                                        Sunday Review
                                    
	
                                        Video: Opinion
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Arts

                        	
                                        Today's Arts
                                    
	
                                        Art & Design
                                    
	
                                        Books
                                    
	
                                        Dance
                                    
	
                                        Movies
                                    
	
                                        Music
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Television
                                    
	
                                        Theater
                                    
	
                                        Video: Arts
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Living

                        	
                                        Automobiles
                                    
	
                                        Crossword
                                    
	
                                        Food
                                    
	
                                        Education
                                    
	
                                        Fashion & Style
                                    
	
                                        Health
                                    
	
                                        Jobs
                                    
	
                                        Magazine
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Real Estate
                                    
	
                                        T Magazine
                                    
	
                                        Travel
                                    
	
                                        Weddings & Celebrations
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Listings & More

                        	
                                        Reader Center
                                    
	
                                        Classifieds
                                    
	
                                        Tools & Services
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Multimedia
                                    
	
                                        Photography
                                    
	
                                        Video
                                    
	
                                        NYT Store
                                    
	
                                        Times Journeys
                                    
	
                                        Subscribe
                                    
	
                                        Manage My Account
                                    
	
                                        NYTCo
                                    


                    


                            
            
                
Subscribe


	Subscribe
	
        
                    Home Delivery
            
	
        
                    Digital Subscriptions
            
	
        
        Crossword
    



	
        Email Newsletters
    
	
        Alerts
    
	
                    Gift Subscriptions
            
	
                    Group Subscriptions
            
	
                    Education Rate
            


	
        Mobile Applications
    
	
                    Replica Edition
            


            


        


    



            
    
        Site Information Navigation

         	
                
                    © 2018 The New York Times Company

	Home
	Search
	Accessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.
	Contact Us
	Work With Us
	Advertise
	Your Ad Choices
	Privacy
	Terms of Service
	Terms of Sale


    
    
        Site Information Navigation

        	Site Map
	Help
	Site Feedback
	Subscriptions


    

        
    
    
            
    


    



















