




  

    
      
      Skip to main content
    


        
    

	
    
    
              
                                    
                [image: National Endowment for the Humanities logo]                              
 
                              
 
                	    	      
	        Secondary Menu

	        	Events
	Humanities Magazine
	Staff Directory

	      
 
	                  

  
 Search this site: 
 












 
                      
  

    
    	
		
			YouTube
	
	
		
			Twitter
	
	
		
			Facebook
	
	
		
			Instagram
	
	
		
			Snapchat
	
	
		
			NEH Gov Delivery
	




    
  


 

 
          
 
	

	
			    	      
	        Main Menu

	        	Home
	About NEH
	Grants
	Divisions and Offices
	News
	Explore

	      
 
	        

    

    
    


    
        
    
    
          
        You are here:

        Home  /  Divisions and Offices  /  Office of Digital Humanities      
 
    
    
            
  

    
    Office of Digital Humanities



    
  


 

 
    
    
      
        
        
        
                      
													Grant News

										
						
																	
						Grant Announcement for Humanities High Performance Computing Program						
			 									
				            

                    
            		





  

      
    

  
  
    	
  		
  			December 1, 2008
								 | By Brett Bobley				
  		

		
			
        
    	
	      	[image: PRINT]PRINT
	Email


	      

    

    
		            								
	
		On November 18, I gave a presentation at the Supercomputing 2008 conference in Austin, Texas and announced the winners of the NEH/Department of Energy Humanities High Performance Computing program.

These grants provide computer time on DOE machines at the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC) at DOE’s Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, as well as training and support to enable scholars to take full advantage of those resources in accordance with the DOE High-End Computing Revitalization Act of 2004 (P.L. 108–423) which authorized the Department to “provide for sustained access by the research community in the United States to high-end computing systems and to Leadership Systems, including provision of technical support for users of such systems.”

The grants announced were:

	
		The Perseus Digital Library at Tufts University for its project Large-Scale Learning and the Automatic Analysis of Historical Texts. The Perseus project will be using advanced computational linguistic technologies to experiment with the analysis of ancient texts for the study of classics and other fields.
	
		The University of California, San Diego for its project Visualizing Patterns in Databases of Cultural Images and Video. UC San Diego will be creating computerized visualizations of large databases of digitized cultural heritage materials and performing statistical analyses on the data to discover new ways of studying art and culture.
	
		The Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities at the University of Virginia for its project High Performance Computing for Processing and Analysis of Digitized 3-D Models of Cultural Heritage. IATH will process previously-acquired raw datasets of culturally valuable objects such as artistic statuary, archaeological artifacts, and historical architecture in order to create highly accurate 3-D models for the study of art and architecture.


I was very impressed with the Supercomputing 2008 conference. There was a huge turnout – nearly 10,000 attendees, I believe. Kevin Franklin from I-CHASS was kind enough to introduce me to a number of people from various supercomputing centers that were in attendance. I must say that I was happy to hear so many people talking about the humanities and how high performance computing might be a useful tool for some of the work that humanists do. In fact, after my talk, the NCSA (National Center for Supercomputing Applications) at the University of Illinois announced that they will also be making one million hours available for the humanities. There seems to be a lot of excitement in this space.


						
										
		
        
	

  
	
			    
		    Keywords: 	high performance computing


 	    

										
	


	

	
		
		
	      	[image: PRINT]PRINT
	Email


	      

	

		




        
 

              

      
 

                
  

    
    	Divisions and Offices Home
	Education Programs
	Preservation and Access
	Public Programs
	Research Programs
	Federal/State Partnership
	Challenge Grants
	Office of Digital Humanities	About ODH
	ODH Staff
	Featured Projects
	Grant News
	In the Field
	Institutes








    
  


 
  
  

          ODH Resources

    
    	Resource Library
	HHPC





    
  


 
  
  

    
    Subscribe Keep up-to-date with Division news.



    
  


 
  
  

          Grant Programs

    
    	Current
	Passed


    
  
  
      
        
      
  
  
        
          Digital Humanities Advancement Grants


Deadline: 
June 5, 2018
    
  

 
  

  
      
  
  
        
          Humanities Open Book Program


Deadline: 
September 26, 2018
    
  

 
  

  
      
  
  
        
          Institutes for Advanced Topics in the Digital Humanities


Deadline: 
March 12, 2019
    
  

 
  

 
    

  
  
  
  
      
      View All » 
    

  
  
 


    
  
  
      
        
      
  
  
        
          Digging Into Data Challenge


Deadline: 
June 29, 2016
    
  

 
  

 
    

  
  
  
  
      
      View All » 

    

  
  
 






    
  


 
  
  

    
    
    
  
  
      
        
      
  
  
        
          Contact Information


Email: odh@neh.gov

    
  

 
  

 
    

  
  
  
  
  
  
 



    
  


 

 
      
          

    
 

    
	

        
    
	
 


  
 
	
	
	      
                    
  

    
    
	
			
				Edsitement
	
				Standing Together
	
				Chronicling America
	
				Created Equal


	





	
			
				About NEH
	
				Contact NEH
	
				National Council on the Humanities
	
				State Humanities Councils
	
				Awards and Honors
	
				Budget, Performance, and Legal Information
	
				Plain Writing at NEH
	
				Office of the Inspector General
	
				Equal Employment Opportunities
	
				Career Opportunities
	
				Website Disclaimers
	
			


	


	
			
				Grants
	
				Search for a Grant
	
				Not sure what to do? Let us help you...
	
				Become a Peer Reviewer
	
				Manage Your Grant
	
				The Application Review Process
	
				Brand Materials


	


	
			
				Divisions and Offices
	
				Education Programs
	
				Preservation and Access
	
				Public Programs
	
				Research Programs
	
				Federal/State Partnership
	
				Office of Challenge Grants
	
				Office of Digital Humanities


	


	
			
				News
	
				Press Releases
	
				News Archive
	
				NEH in the News
	
				NEH Impact Reports
	
				Events
	
				Humanities
	
				Back Issues
	
				Subscribe
	
				Magazine Staff
	
				Explore


	





		
			Contact Us
	
			
				
					National Endowment 

					for the Humanities 

					400 7th Street SW 

					Washington, DC 20506


				
					General Information

					1-800-NEH-1121

					202-606-8400


				
					Federal Relay (TTY Users):

					800-877-8399


				
					questions[at]neh[dot]gov

			

		
	
			Connect With Us
	
				
					
						YouTube

				
	
					
						Twitter

				
	
					
						Facebook

				
	
					
						NEH Social Media

				


		






	
		www.neh.gov


	
		FOIA | No Fear Act | Office of the Inspector General | Accessibility | Privacy Policy and Terms of Use | Website Disclaimers | Open Gov | Plain Writing at NEH





    
  


 

 
                              
 
		

	
 


  


    
    
    

