
    
    

    
        
            
                
                    NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please upgrade your browser.
                    LEARN MORE »
                
            

        

    




    
    
    
        
            Sections
            
                Home
            
            Search
            Skip to content
                        Skip to navigation
                                    View mobile version
                    

        
            
                
                    The New York Times
                
            

            
        

                
            Arts|Digital Keys for Unlocking the Humanities’ Riches

        

        
            



            





            Search
            
                Subscribe Now
                Log In
                

                                0
                Settings
            

        

    

    
    Close search
    
    Site Search Navigation

    
        
            
                                Search NYTimes.com
                            

            
                                
                
                Clear this text input
                
                    

                

                Go
            

        

    






    


            
    
        	
                Loading...

            


        
            
                See next articles
                
                    

                

            
            
                See previous articles
                
                    

                

            
        

    




        
    Site Navigation




    Site Mobile Navigation



    

    
        
    
    Advertisement






        
        

    


                        
    
                                
                            
                    Supported by
                    

                

                                        
                                                                                            Arts
                                                                            |                            Humanities 2.0                                                            

                        			Digital Keys for Unlocking the Humanities’ Riches

	                                                
                                                                                                    

By PATRICIA COHENNOV. 16, 2010



                                    
                        
Continue reading the main story
Share This Page

Continue reading the main story




                                                    

                                            

                                            

        

    

    

        
    
    
        
    Photo
    
            [image: ]
            




Martin K. Foys, a medievalist at Drew University, with a detail of an 11th-century map of the world.
                        
            Credit
            James Leynse for The New York Times        
            
    

A history of the humanities in the 20th century could be chronicled in “isms” — formalism, Freudianism, structuralism, postcolonialism — grand intellectual cathedrals from which assorted interpretations of literature, politics and culture spread.
The next big idea in language, history and the arts? Data.
Members of a new generation of digitally savvy humanists argue it is time to stop looking for inspiration in the next political or philosophical “ism” and start exploring how technology is changing our understanding of the liberal arts. This latest frontier is about method, they say, using powerful technologies and vast stores of digitized materials that previous humanities scholars did not have.
These researchers are digitally mapping Civil War battlefields to understand what role topography played in victory, using databases of thousands of jam sessions to track how musical collaborations influenced jazz, searching through large numbers of scientific texts and books to track where concepts first appeared and how they spread, and combining animation, charts and primary documents about Thomas Jefferson’s travels  to create new ways to  teach history.
This alliance of geeks and poets has generated exhilaration and also anxiety. The humanities, after all, deal with elusive questions of aesthetics, existence and meaning, the words that bring tears or the melody that raises goose bumps. Are these elements that can be measured?

    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story


“The digital humanities do fantastic things,” said the eminent Princeton historian Anthony Grafton. “I’m a believer in quantification. But I don’t believe quantification can do everything. So much of humanistic scholarship is about interpretation.”
        Continue reading the main story
    
    
    



    
    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story
    






    
        “It’s easy to forget the digital media are means and not ends,” he added.
Digital humanities scholars also face a more practical test: What knowledge can they produce that their predecessors could not? “I call it the ‘Where’s the beef?’ question said Tom Scheinfeldt, managing director of the Center for History and New Media at George Mason University.
Hoping to find the “beef,” the National Endowment for the Humanities teamed up with the National Science Foundation and institutions in Canada and Britain last year to create the Digging Into Data Challenge, a grant program designed to push research in new directions.
As Brett Bobley, director of the endowment’s office of digital humanities, explained, analyzing unprecedented amounts of data can reveal patterns and trends and raise unexpected questions for study. He offered the human genome project as an example of how an area of study can be transformed: “Technology hasn’t just made astronomy, biology and physics more efficient. It has let scientists do research they simply couldn’t do before.”
Mr. Bobley said the emerging field of digital humanities is probably best understood as an umbrella term covering a wide range of activities, from online preservation and digital mapping to data mining and the use of geographic information systems.
Some pioneering efforts began years ago, but most humanities professors remain unaware, uninterested or unconvinced that digital humanities has much to offer. Even historians, who have  used databases before, have been slow to embrace the trend. Just one of the nearly 300 main panels scheduled for next year’s annual meeting of the American Historical Association covers digital matters. Still, universities, professional associations and private institutions are increasingly devoting a larger slice of the pie to the field.
“The humanities and social sciences are the emerging domains for using high-performance computers,” said Peter Bajcsy, a research scientist at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
In Europe 10 nations have embarked on a large-scale project, beginning in March,  that plans to digitize arts and humanities data. Last  summer Google awarded $1 million to professors doing digital humanities research, and last year the National Endowment for the Humanities spent $2 million on digital projects.

    Photo
    
            [image: ]
            


A digital project created by University of Virginia students allows users to examine Thomas Jefferson's life through primary documents. The map at right visualizes part of Jefferson's 1786 trip to England.
                        
            Credit
            Bill Ferster and Scot French, University of Virginia        
            
    
One of the endowment’s grantees is Dan Edelstein, an associate  professor of French and Italian at Stanford University who is charting the flow of ideas during the Enlightenment. The era’s great thinkers — Locke, Newton, Voltaire — exchanged tens of thousands of letters; Voltaire alone wrote more than 18,000.

    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story


“You could form an impressionistic sense of the shape and content of a correspondence, but no one could really know the whole picture,” said Mr. Edelstein, who, along with collaborators at Stanford and Oxford University in England, is using a geographic information system to trace the letters’ journeys.
He continued: “Where were these networks going? Did they actually have the breadth that people would often boast about, or were they functioning in a different way? We’re able to ask new questions.”

    Newsletter Sign Up

    Continue reading the main story
        
        
    
    
        
            
                Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.

                Invalid email address. Please re-enter.

                You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.

            

            
                
                Sign Up
            

        

        
            
                
            

            
                You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.
            

        

        

    

    
        Thank you for subscribing.

        An error has occurred. Please try again later.

        You are already subscribed to this email.

        View all New York Times newsletters.

    

    	See Sample
	Manage Email Preferences
	Not you?
	Privacy Policy
	Opt out or contact us anytime


    




One surprising revelation of the Mapping the Republic of Letters project was the paucity of exchanges between Paris and London, Mr. Edelstein said. The common narrative is that the Enlightenment started in England and spread to the rest of Europe. “You would think if England was this fountainhead of freedom and religious tolerance,” he said, “there would have been greater continuing interest there than what our correspondence map shows us.”
Mr. Edelstein said that many of his senior colleagues view his work as whimsical, the result of playing with technological toys. But he argues such play can lead to discoveries.
In Mr. Scheinfeldt’s view academia has moved into “a post-theoretical age.” This “methodological moment,” he said, is similar to the late 19th and early 20th centuries, when scholars were preoccupied with collating and cataloging the flood of information brought about by revolutions in communication, transportation and science. The practical issues of discipline building, of assembling an annotated bibliography, of defining the research agenda and what it means to be a historian “were the main work of a great number of scholars,” he said.
Figuring out how to collect, house and connect more than 350 years of scholarship motivated Martin K. Foys, a medievalist at Drew University in Madison, N.J., to create a digital map of the Bayeux Tapestry, a gargantuan 11th-century embroidery displayed in a museum in Bayeux, France, that depicts the Battle of Hastings, when the Normans conquered England. At 224 feet long, about two-thirds the length of a football field, this tapestry is both a work of art and a historical document that mingles text and image.
“It is almost impossible to study traditionally,” Mr. Foys said.  No one person could digest the work’s enormous amount of material, and no single printing could render it accurately, so Mr. Foys created a prize-winning digital version with commentary that scholars could scroll through. Such digital mapping has the potential to transform medieval studies, Mr. Foys said.
His latest project, which he directs with Shannon Bradshaw, a computer scientist at Drew, and Asa Simon Mittman, an art historian from California State University, Chico, is an online network of medieval maps and texts that scholars can work on simultaneously. Once specific areas of maps are identified and tagged with information, it becomes possible to analyze and compare quantifiable data about images and sources, he explained, adding, “We have a whole new set of tools not dominated by the written word.”

    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story


The online network of maps is distinct from most scholarly endeavors in another respect: It is communal. The traditional model of the solitary humanities professor, toiling away in an archive or spending years composing a philosophical treatise or historical opus is replaced in this project with contributions from a global community of experts.
“The ease with which a community can collaborate on the production of scholarship is something that is fundamentally changing the way we do our work,” said Mr. Foys, whose 2007 book, “Virtually Anglo-Saxon,” discusses the influence of technology on scholarship.


Digital humanities is  so new that its practitioners are frequently surprised by what develops.
When the collected published works of Abraham Lincoln were posted online a few years ago, the director of the Papers of Abraham Lincoln, Daniel W. Stowell, said he expected historians to be the most frequent visitors to his project’s site. But he was surprised to discover that the heaviest users were connected to Oxford University Press; editors of the Oxford English Dictionary had been searching the papers to track down the first appearance of particular words.
“People will use this data in ways we can’t even imagine yet,” Mr. Stowell said, “and I think that is one of the most exciting developments in the humanities.”

    
                HUMANITIES 2.0: This is the first in a series about how digital tools are
changing scholarship in history, literature and the arts.


        
        
        A version of this article appears in print on November 17, 2010, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: HUMANITIES 2.0: A New Enlightenment: Digital Keys to the Humanities’ Riches.   Order Reprints|  Today's Paper|Subscribe




    

    
        Continue reading the main story
    
    
    



    
    

    We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.





    
        
    
    
                
            Related Coverage

        
        	
    

        
        
                        
                Mapping the Enlightenment
                                    NOV. 16, 2010
                                            

        

    


	
    

        
        
                            ARTSBEAT BLOG 

                        
                Digitally Mapping the Republic of Letters
                                    NOV. 16, 2010
                                            

        

    




    





    
    

    	
	
	
	






    




    




    



    




    
        Related Coverage

    
    
        	
    
        
                        
                Mapping the Enlightenment
                                    NOV. 16, 2010
                                            

        


            


	
    
        
                            ARTSBEAT BLOG 

                        
                Digitally Mapping the Republic of Letters
                                    NOV. 16, 2010
                                            

        


            




            






    What's Next

    
        
            Loading...

        

    






           
 



                    

            
            
    
        Go to Home Page »

        
            Site Index
            
                The New York Times
            
        

        
    

    
        Site Index Navigation

        

                                                        
                    
                        News

                        	
                                        World
                                    
	
                                        U.S.
                                    
	
                                        Politics
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.
                                    
	
                                        Business
                                    
	
                                        Tech
                                    
	
                                        Science
                                    
	
                                        Health
                                    
	
                                        Sports
                                    
	
                                        Education
                                    
	
                                        Obituaries
                                    
	
                                        Today's Paper
                                    
	
                                        Corrections
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Opinion

                        	
                                        Today's Opinion
                                    
	
                                        Op-Ed Columnists
                                    
	
                                        Editorials
                                    
	
                                        Op-Ed Contributors
                                    
	
                                        Letters
                                    
	
                                        Sunday Review
                                    
	
                                        Video: Opinion
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Arts

                        	
                                        Today's Arts
                                    
	
                                        Art & Design
                                    
	
                                        Books
                                    
	
                                        Dance
                                    
	
                                        Movies
                                    
	
                                        Music
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Television
                                    
	
                                        Theater
                                    
	
                                        Video: Arts
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Living

                        	
                                        Automobiles
                                    
	
                                        Crossword
                                    
	
                                        Food
                                    
	
                                        Education
                                    
	
                                        Fashion & Style
                                    
	
                                        Health
                                    
	
                                        Jobs
                                    
	
                                        Magazine
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Real Estate
                                    
	
                                        T Magazine
                                    
	
                                        Travel
                                    
	
                                        Weddings & Celebrations
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Listings & More

                        	
                                        Reader Center
                                    
	
                                        Classifieds
                                    
	
                                        Tools & Services
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Multimedia
                                    
	
                                        Photography
                                    
	
                                        Video
                                    
	
                                        NYT Store
                                    
	
                                        Times Journeys
                                    
	
                                        Subscribe
                                    
	
                                        Manage My Account
                                    
	
                                        NYTCo
                                    


                    


                            
            
                
Subscribe


	Subscribe
	
        
                    Home Delivery
            
	
        
                    Digital Subscriptions
            
	
        
        Crossword
    



	
        Email Newsletters
    
	
        Alerts
    
	
                    Gift Subscriptions
            
	
                    Group Subscriptions
            
	
                    Education Rate
            


	
        Mobile Applications
    
	
                    Replica Edition
            


            


        


    



            
    
        Site Information Navigation

         	
                
                    © 2018 The New York Times Company

	Home
	Search
	Accessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.
	Contact Us
	Work With Us
	Advertise
	Your Ad Choices
	Privacy
	Terms of Service
	Terms of Sale


    
    
        Site Information Navigation

        	Site Map
	Help
	Site Feedback
	Subscriptions


    

        
    
    
            
    


    



















