
		
		
		
			
				
				University of Illinois Press

			



		
				Facebook Page
	Instagram/span>
	UIP Blog
	Twitter Page
	Join Our Email List


               

               			
			
				
				Shopping Cart
			

			
	                 	
			
  	Home
	About Us
				Mission Statement
	History of the Press
	Staff Directory
	Submission Guidelines
	Faculty Board
	Privacy Policy
	Annual Report
	Employment


	
	Books
				Browse Books
						Browse by title
	Browse by author
	Browse by subject
	Browse by series
	Browse by catalog
	Browse by course adoption


				
	Ordering
	For Instructors
	For Authors
	For the Media
	Rights & Permissions
	RSS Feeds
	Events Calendar
	Recent Award Winners


		
	E-Books
				E-Book Ordering
	Browse E-Books
						Browse by title
	Browse by author
	Browse by subject
	Browse by series


				
	E-Book Heritage Projects
	Women in Print series


		
	Journals
				Browse Journals
	Subscribe
	Journals Online
	News
	Advertise
	Contact
	Publish Your Journal
	Calls for Papers
	Common Threads


		
	For Authors
				Welcome (start here)
	Submit a Proposal
	Submit a Manuscript for Review
	Preparing the Final Materials
	Marketing Your Book with Us


		
	Contact
        	Staff Directory
	Book Orders
	Book Publicity
(review copies, author interviews, etc.)
	Desk/Exam Copy Requests
	Journals Contacts
	Rights and Permissions
	Information for Authors
	General Inquiries


        
	Support our Press




		
		
			
	
        Nothing
	
	
	






                        

		

		
		
		
			
			
			
				





					
					

					

Cloth - $95.00

978-0-252-03641-5





						
						
						

Paper - $27.00

978-0-252-07820-0





						
						

                                                

Ebook - $24.30

978-0-252-09344-9






						
						


				

				
				
						Author:
	Stephen Ramsay
	Pub Date:
	December 2011
	Pages:
	112 pages
	Dimensions:
	6 x 9 in. 
	Illustrations:
	3 line drawings, 3 tables

Cloth edition is unjacketed

	Series:
	Topics in the Digital Humanities


				

				
				
Critical Theory Literary Studies
See all Subjects


Table of Contents


				
				
		                        Exam and Desk Copies
					Rights and Permissions
					Media Review Copies
		                        Alternate Format Request
					Print a Flyer
				

	
    				
           				
					
					

           				
					
					

				

				

			

			
			
			
			
				
                                 
	[image: Cover for ramsay: Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism. Click for larger image]

   


   Close Previewx


 
      

      
 
 




			

  
    



   						
  





[image: Ebook Information]



						
							
							
							
							
							
							
						
						

			


					
Reading Machines

Toward an Algorithmic Criticism

Rethinking digital literary criticism by situating computational work within the broader context of the humanities

Besides familiar and now-commonplace tasks that computers do all the time, what else are they capable of? Stephen Ramsay's intriguing study of computational text analysis examines how computers can be used as "reading machines" to open up entirely new possibilities for literary critics. Computer-based text analysis has been employed for the past several decades as a way of searching, collating, and indexing texts. Despite this, the digital revolution has not penetrated the core activity of literary studies: interpretive analysis of written texts.  
Computers can handle vast amounts of data, allowing for the comparison of texts in ways that were previously too overwhelming for individuals, but they may also assist in enhancing the entirely necessary role of subjectivity in critical interpretation. Reading Machines discusses the importance of this new form of text analysis conducted with the assistance of computers. Ramsay suggests that the rigidity of computation can be enlisted by intuition, subjectivity, and play.



"This significant book by the progenitor o the term 'algorithmic criticism' packs a lot into its slender binding.  Pithy, readable, and full of striking turns of phrase, it reaches for a broader audience for the debates over the application of computers to the critical enterprise."--Literary and Linguistic Computing


"Anchored by his incisive, prescient, and influential essay 'Toward an Algorithmic Criticism,' Stephen Ramsay's book is filled with trenchant critical arguments and paradigmatic examples that traverse contemporary literary computing to argue that doing technology is now not necessarily different from doing humanities; it is in fact another humanities activity. Human beings live, work, feel, express, and reflect. Speech, writing, images, and now text-mining are ways of 'doing,' and understanding, the literature of the human. Ramsay makes his case to both digital humanities scholars and the broader audience of the humanities with a unique blend of technical authority and open-ended, accessible humanistic inquiry."--Alan Liu, author of Local Transcendence: Essays on Postmodern Historicism and the Database  

  "Reading Machines makes an important and provocative contribution to the fields of literary criticism and digital humanities. With sound scholarship and lucid argumentation, this book will stir up debate among both traditionalists and digital humanities scholars."--David L. Hoover, author of Stylistics: Prospect and Retrospect



Stephen Ramsay is an associate professor of English at the University of Nebraska and has written and lectured widely on subjects related to literary theory and software design for humanities.


To order online:

//www.press.uillinois.edu/books/catalog/75tms2pw9780252036415.html

To order by phone:

(800) 621-2736 (USA/Canada)

(773) 702-7000 (International)







Related Titles


previous book
next book






[image: Reading Ronell - Cover]Reading Ronell 
Edited by Diane Davis



[image: Redesigning Women - Cover]Redesigning Women Television after the Network Era
Amanda D. Lotz



[image: Eight Women Philosophers - Cover]Eight Women Philosophers Theory, Politics, and Feminism
Jane Duran



[image: Private Prisons in America - Cover]Private Prisons in America A Critical Race Perspective
Michael A. Hallett



[image: Normative Theories of the Media - Cover]Normative Theories of the Media Journalism in Democratic Societies
Clifford G. Christians, Theodore L. Glasser, Denis McQuail, Kaarle Nordenstreng, and Robert A. White



[image: Dictations - Cover]Dictations On Haunted Writing
Avital Ronell



[image: Racial Blackness and the Discontinuity of Western Modernity - Cover]Racial Blackness and the Discontinuity of Western Modernity 
Lindon Barrett



[image: Democracy, Inc. - Cover]Democracy, Inc. The Press and Law in the Corporate Rationalization of the Public Sphere
David S. Allen



[image: Philosophy, Crime, and Criminology - Cover]Philosophy, Crime, and Criminology 
Edited by Bruce A. Arrigo and Christopher R. Williams



[image: American Literary Realism - Cover]American Literary Realism 
Edited by Gary Scharnhorst








					

					
				

			

			
			
			


	
		
				
				University of Illinois
			

	


	
		
	        Copyright 2018

		by the Board of Trustees

		of the University of Illinois
	



		
		1325 South Oak Street

		Champaign, IL 61820-6903

		217-333-0950
	


	
		
        Privacy Policy
	Annual Report
        Website Feedback
        
	





			


    
   

    
       
            [image: Close]
         Reading Machines ebook is available for immediate download from the following vendors:

        Amazon.com

        Barnes & Noble

        Kobo

        Google Play

      

    

 





		