
    
    

    
        
            
                
                    NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please upgrade your browser.
                    LEARN MORE »
                
            

        

    




    
    
    
        
            Sections
            
                Home
            
            Search
            Skip to content
                        Skip to navigation
                                    View mobile version
                    

        
            
                
                    The New York Times
                
            

            
        

                
            Books|A Family Full of Unhappiness, Hoping for Transcendence

        

        
            



            





            Search
            
                Subscribe Now
                Log In
                                                0
                Settings
            

        

    

    
    Close search
    
    Site Search Navigation

    
        
            
                                Search NYTimes.com
                            

            
                                
                
                Clear this text input
                
                    

                

                Go
            

        

    






    


            
    
        	
                Loading...

            


        
            
                See next articles
                
                    

                

            
            
                See previous articles
                
                    

                

            
        

    




        
    Site Navigation




    Site Mobile Navigation



    

    
        
    
    Advertisement






        
        

    


                        
    
                                
                            
                    Supported by
                    

                

                                        
                                                                                            Books
                                                                                                                                                                    

                        			A Family Full of Unhappiness, Hoping for Transcendence

	                                                
                
    
                Books of The Times            

    By                     
                                    MICHIKO KAKUTANI
                            
                AUG. 15, 2010
    



                                                
                                    
                        
Continue reading the main story
Share This Page

Continue reading the main story




                                                                                                

                                            

        

    

    

        
    
    
        Jonathan Franzen’s galvanic new novel, “Freedom,” showcases his impressive literary toolkit — every essential storytelling skill, plus plenty of bells and whistles — and his ability to throw open a big, Updikean picture window on American middle-class life. With this book, he’s not only created an unforgettable family, he’s also completed his own transformation from a sharp-elbowed, apocalyptic satirist focused on sending up the socio-economic-political plight of this country into a kind of 19th-century realist concerned with the public and private lives of his characters.
Whereas Mr. Franzen’s first novel, “The Twenty-Seventh City,” borrowed liberally from the likes of Thomas Pynchon and Don DeLillo to create a dark, splashy picture of a futuristic St. Louis, his 2001 bestseller, “The Corrections,”  signaled his determination to write an American sort of “Buddenbrooks,” to conjure contemporary America — not by going for a cartoonish, zeitgeist-y epic but by deconstructing a family’s history to give us a wide-angled portrait of the country as it rumbled into the materialistic 1990s.
While “The Corrections” attested to Mr. Franzen’s discovery of his own limber voice and tamed his penchant for sociological pontification, the novel was something of a hybrid in which the author’s satiric instincts and misanthropic view of the world sometimes seemed at odds with his new drive to create fully three-dimensional people. It felt, at times, as if he were self-importantly inflating the symbolic meaning of his characters’ experiences, even as he condescendingly attributed to them every venal quality from hypocrisy and vanity to paranoia and Machiavellian conniving.

    Photo
    
            [image: ]
            




In the opening pages of “Freedom,” this dynamic seems even more exaggerated, as we are introduced to members of the Berglund family as an assortment of disagreeable caricatures, who perplex and perturb their neighbors in St. Paul. Known for his “niceness,”  Walter Berglund is a weak, passive-aggressive husband and father, who weirdly sells out his nature-loving ideals to work with an evil coal company. His wife, Patty, also seems “nicey-nice” on the surface, but turns out to be an ill-tempered shrew, who rages at Walter and inexplicably slashes a neighbor’s new snow tires. Their cocky teenage son, Joey, is so unhappy at home that he moves out of the house and in with his girlfriend’s family next door.

    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story


It turns out, however, that these farcical sketches are simply meant to show how the Berglunds might be perceived by outsiders, just as Patty’s account of this period of her life, which immediately follows in the book, reflects her own need to filter everything through the prism of her anger and depression. As “The Corrections” dramatically demonstrated, Mr. Franzen is extremely adept at depicting those two emotions — which not just Patty, but nearly every character in this novel suffers from, too, and which all of them trace back to injustices or slights suffered at the hands of their parents.
        Continue reading the main story
    
    
    



    
    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story
    






    
        As the novel proceeds, however, Mr. Franzen delves further into the state of mind of his creations, developing them into fully imagined human beings — not Nietzschean stereotypes easily divided into categories of “hard” (shameless, ambitious brutes) or “soft” (pathetic, sniveling doormats); not bitter patsies fueled by ancient grudges, but confused, searching people capable of change and perhaps even transcendence.
We come to understand the dynamics between the earnest and eager-to-please Walter, a good soldier reeling with suppressed rage; and Patty, college athlete turned housewife, who indulges in alcohol and sarcasm to assuage her sense of uselessness and loss. We also come to intimately know Walter’s best friend, Richard, a cool, charming musician and compulsive womanizer, whom Patty first fell in love with decades ago and with whom she later has an affair.

    Photo
    
            [image: ]
            


Jonathan Franzen, the author of the novel “Freedom.”
                        
            Credit
            Greg Martin        
            
    
Mr. Franzen’s repeated allusions to “War and Peace,”  suggesting that there is some sort of parallel between the Walter-Richard-Patty triangle and the Pierre-Andrei-Natasha triangle in Tolstoy’s great classic, are laughably conceited, but he does an agile job of tracing the constantly evolving relationships among his three main characters, as well the dynamics between Walter and Patty, and their two children, Joey and Jessica. He understands the improvised game of emotional dominoes that can play out in families, and the psychological chutes and ladders that can pop up in their lives out of the blue.
From the start of his career with “The Twenty-Seventh City,” Mr. Franzen has been ambitious, striving to write a Big American Novel that might capture a  national mind-set, and this novel is no exception. Its title, “Freedom,” announces a theme that runs like a riptide beneath the narrative — lots of talk about what liberty means in terms of being free of familial responsibilities and ideological beliefs, and the rootlessness and dislocation that often follow in its wake.
But it is neither this heavy-handed leitmotif nor the twisty, Dickensian plot (which has Walter and Joey getting involved with a ruthless Halliburton-like company) that lends this novel its narrative heft and hold on the reader. Rather, it is Mr. Franzen’s characters and his David Foster Wallace-esque ability to capture the absurdities of contemporary life — where the planet is “heating up like a toaster oven”  and people use credit cards to buy a pack of gum or a single hot dog (“I mean cash is so yesterday”), where rage among liberals and conservatives alike is scorching the country in the George W. Bush  years, and intemperate blog entries and Howard Beale-like outbursts are cheered as expressions of a collective distemper.
Writing in prose that is at once visceral and lapidary, Mr. Franzen shows us how his characters strive to navigate a world of technological gadgetry and ever-shifting mores, how they struggle to balance the equation between their expectations of life and dull reality, their political ideals and mercenary personal urges. He proves himself as adept at adolescent comedy (what happens to Joey after he accidentally swallows his wedding ring right before a vacation with his dream girl) as he is at grown-up tragedy (what happens to Walter’s assistant and new beloved when she sets off alone on a trip to West Virginia coal country); as skilled at holding a mirror to the world his people inhabit day by dreary day as he is at limning their messy inner lives.
In the past, Mr. Franzen tended to impose a seemingly cynical, mechanistic view of the world on his characters, threatening to turn them into authorial pawns subject to simple Freudian-Darwinian imperatives. This time, in creating conflicted, contrarian individuals capable of choosing their own fates, Mr. Franzen has written his most deeply felt novel yet — a novel that turns out to be both a compelling biography of a dysfunctional family and an indelible portrait of our times.


FREEDOM

By Jonathan Franzen

562 pages. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $28.





    
                Follow Michiko Kakutani on Twitter: @michikokakutani


        
        
        A version of this review appears in print on August 16, 2010, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Family Full of Unhappiness, Still Hoping for Transcendence.   Today's Paper|Subscribe




    

    
        Continue reading the main story
    
    
    



    
    

    We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.





    
        
    
    
                
            Related Coverage

        
        	
    

        
        
                            EXCERPT 

                        
                Freedom - By Jonathan Franzen
                                    AUG. 15, 2010
                                            

        

    


	
    

                    
                [image: ]
                

            

        
        
                        
                Book Review - Freedom - By Jonathan Franzen
                                    AUG. 19, 2010
                                            

        

    


	
    

        
        
                            TIMES TOPIC 

                        
                Jonathan Franzen
                                                                                

        

    




    





    
    

    	
	
	
	






    
    
                
                        
                
                    Books of The Times

                    Book reviews by The Times’s critics.

                

            

            

        
        	
    
        
            
                                ‘Barracoon’ and ‘Slave Old Man’ Approach the Trauma of Slavery With Care and Kinship            
            MAY 2
        

    


	
    
        
            
                                In ‘The Moralist,’ Woodrow Wilson and the Hazards of Idealism            
            MAY 1
        

    


	
    
        
            
                                To Make Someone Be or Not to Make Someone Be            
            APR 30
        

    


	
    
        
            
                                A True-Crime Mystery From the 1950s, Fueled by Racism and Corruption            
            APR 25
        

    


	
    
        
            
                                In a Raft of New Books, Motherhood From (Almost) Every Angle            
            APR 24
        

    




        
            See More »

        
    




    




    
        Related Coverage

    
    
        	
    
        
                            EXCERPT 

                        
                Freedom - By Jonathan Franzen
                                    AUG. 15, 2010
                                            

        


            


	
    
        
                        
                Book Review - Freedom - By Jonathan Franzen
                                    AUG. 19, 2010
                                            

        


                    
                [image: ]
                

            

            


	
    
        
                            TIMES TOPIC 

                        
                Jonathan Franzen
                                                                                

        


            




            






    What's Next

    
        
            Loading...

        

    






           
 



                    

            
            
    
        Go to Home Page »

        
            Site Index
            
                The New York Times
            
        

        
    

    
        Site Index Navigation

        

                                                        
                    
                        News

                        	
                                        World
                                    
	
                                        U.S.
                                    
	
                                        Politics
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.
                                    
	
                                        Business
                                    
	
                                        Tech
                                    
	
                                        Science
                                    
	
                                        Health
                                    
	
                                        Sports
                                    
	
                                        Education
                                    
	
                                        Obituaries
                                    
	
                                        Today's Paper
                                    
	
                                        Corrections
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Opinion

                        	
                                        Today's Opinion
                                    
	
                                        Op-Ed Columnists
                                    
	
                                        Editorials
                                    
	
                                        Op-Ed Contributors
                                    
	
                                        Letters
                                    
	
                                        Sunday Review
                                    
	
                                        Video: Opinion
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Arts

                        	
                                        Today's Arts
                                    
	
                                        Art & Design
                                    
	
                                        Books
                                    
	
                                        Dance
                                    
	
                                        Movies
                                    
	
                                        Music
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Television
                                    
	
                                        Theater
                                    
	
                                        Video: Arts
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Living

                        	
                                        Automobiles
                                    
	
                                        Crossword
                                    
	
                                        Food
                                    
	
                                        Education
                                    
	
                                        Fashion & Style
                                    
	
                                        Health
                                    
	
                                        Jobs
                                    
	
                                        Magazine
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Real Estate
                                    
	
                                        T Magazine
                                    
	
                                        Travel
                                    
	
                                        Weddings & Celebrations
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Listings & More

                        	
                                        Reader Center
                                    
	
                                        Classifieds
                                    
	
                                        Tools & Services
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Multimedia
                                    
	
                                        Photography
                                    
	
                                        Video
                                    
	
                                        NYT Store
                                    
	
                                        Times Journeys
                                    
	
                                        Subscribe
                                    
	
                                        Manage My Account
                                    
	
                                        NYTCo
                                    


                    


                            
            
                
Subscribe


	Subscribe
	
        
                    Home Delivery
            
	
        
                    Digital Subscriptions
            
	
        
        Crossword
    



	
        Email Newsletters
    
	
        Alerts
    
	
                    Gift Subscriptions
            
	
                    Group Subscriptions
            
	
                    Education Rate
            


	
        Mobile Applications
    
	
                    Replica Edition
            


            


        


    



            
    
        Site Information Navigation

         	
                
                    © 2018 The New York Times Company

	Home
	Search
	Accessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.
	Contact Us
	Work With Us
	Advertise
	Your Ad Choices
	Privacy
	Terms of Service
	Terms of Sale


    
    
        Site Information Navigation

        	Site Map
	Help
	Site Feedback
	Subscriptions


    

        
    
    
            
    


    



















