
Home | Literary Movements  | Timeline  |  American Authors | American Literature Sites |  Bibliographies |  Site Updates 


The Early American Novel: Introductory
Notes

[image: ]

Text-only version 

Sources: Columbia History of the American Novel 
  

  Alexander Cowie, The Rise of the American Novel 
  

  Cathy Davidson, Revolution and the Word: The Rise of 
  the Novel in America 

  See also Ian Watt, The Rise of the Novel; Michael 
  McKeon, The Theory of the Novel: A Historical Approach, 

  and Margaret Doody, The True Story of the Novel 
  

  See also the secondary bibliography on sentimentalism, 
  sensibility, and domestic fiction and the page on 
domestic fiction.
	Reasons
for 


absence
of 

cultural
voices 

in early 

American
novel 	
1. No authentic American language available for
literary purposes.
2. Lack of cultural support for American creative
efforts.

3. American culture tended to be parochial and
generally distrustful of any written expression that was not didactic. 
For example, clergy such as Jonathan Edwards taught that reading novels
was an indulgence leading to moral decline.

4. With an unstable society, there can be no stable
"American" genre of the novel. Cathy Davidson and others have argued that
some novels tried to assume an ideological position (Revolution and
the Word, 1986)--a critique of the existing social order--and that
the more popular the genre became, the more those vested with cultural
authority worried over their loss of dominance.  This was especially
true because novels, unlike sermons, required no intermediaries for interpretation. 

	.	Davidson: "The early American novel, as a genre,
tended to proclaim a socially egalitarian message. It spoke for . . . orphans,
beggar girls, factory girls, or other unfortunates, and it repeatedly advocated
the general need for 'female education'" (73). 

Types:

1. Sentimental

2. Picaresque

3. Gothic

4. Novel of nostalgia or reclamation that unifies
the spirit of the nation

· James Fenimore
Cooper, The Spy (1821)
	Types: 


Sentimental	[bookmark: Sentimental]Sentimental
	
William Hill Brown, The Power of Sympathy
(1789). Brown's novel was based on the story of Perez Morton's seduction
of his wife's sister, Fanny Apthorp, an act at once both incestuous and
adulterous according to eighteenth-century law. The novel insists on the
importance of education for women to avoid such a fate.
	
Susanna
Rowson, Charlotte Temple (1794). A third-person narrative, not an epistolary
novel, this book warns against listening to the "voice of love" and counsels
resistance.


 
	
Hannah Foster, The Coquette (1797). Once again
based on an actual incident, this epistolary novel features a woman seduced
and abandoned who gives birth to an illegitimate stillborn child at an
inn.  The woman (Elizabeth Whitman/Eliza Wharton in the novel) was
charged with arrogance because she had refused marriage until she could
find someone who would be her intellectual companion. Foster tells the
story from her point of view. 


The sentimental novel failed because it could not
sustain a coherent critique of American society.
Contemporary Works (England)

	
1740 Samuel Richardson, Pamela: the first
English book that practically all readers are willing to call a fully realized
novel.
	
1747-1748 Clarissa
	
1753 Sir Charles Grandison

All three are epistolary novels, novels told through
letters written by one or more of the characters. This allows feelings
and reactions to be presented without authorial intrusion, gives a sense
of immediacy because the letters are written in the thick of the action,
and allows the writer to present multiple points of view.
Sentimental novel or novel of sensibility:
This form reflects the sentimentalism of the eighteenth century as reflected
in sentimental comedy and domestic tragedy. Pamela was the beginning
of the vogue, although Fielding's more realistic Tom Jones was written
in protest. Examples of the eighteenth-century sentimental novel:

	
Oliver Goldsmith's The Vicar of Wakefield (1766)
	
Henry Mackenzie's The Man of Feeling (1771)
	
Laurence Sterne's Tristram Shandy (1760-67).

Sensibility: A term for reliance on feelings
as guides to truth and not on reason and law. This term is connected with
primitivism, sentimentalism, the nature movement, and other aspects of
romanticism. The high value that the 18th century put on sensibility
was a reaction against the stoicism of the seventeenth century and the
theories advanced by Hobbes and others that human beings were motivated
primarily by self-interest. 
For a good article on this term, see the excerpt
from Jerome McGann's The
Poetics of Sensibility and the Dictionary
of Sensibility

Sentimentalism: Two meanings. 

1. Overindulgence in emotion especially for the
pleasure that this feeling provides. 

2. Optimistic overemphasis on the goodness of
humanity (sensibility), representing in part a reaction against Calvinism,
which regarded human nature as depraved.

	Types: 


Picaresque	Picaresque

· Began in the 16th century as a counterbalance
to the chivalric romance

Characteristics

· Includes a gallery of human types drawn
from all social classes.

· Features lower class protagonists who
survive by guile and adaptability.

· Hero  is both a trickster and a
victim.

· Features a conflict between the hero's
desire to survive and his natural impulses to side with truth and goodness.

· Uses supporting characters, like Sancho
Panza, who assist the hero.

· Emphasizes freedom and escape from restrictions
of conventional society.
	
Features panoramic scenes.


Purposes

· Contains different types of discourse:
philosophical reflection, travel essay, political disquisition; also parodies
other traditional literary forms, such as poetry and the romance
	
Suitable for commentary on politics of republicanism


· The picaresque's weakness is its inconsistent
point of view--not a problem in Huck Finn, though.
Examples: 

	
Hugh Henry Brackenridge, Modern Chivalry (1792-1815)
	
· Tabitha Gilman Tenney, Female Quixotism:
Exhibited in the Romantic Opinions and Extravagant Adventures of Dorcasina
Sheldon (1801)
	
· Charlotte Lennox, The Female Quixote
(1752)
	
· Royall Tyler, The Algerine Captive
(1797



	Types:


Gothic	3. Gothic
(click on the link for more discussion)

· Conventions: mad monks, castles, ruined
abbeys--and also superstition and delusion, hidden corruption and human
anxieties, mazelike (metaphoric) pathways, haunted minds masked by apparently
normal outward lives.

· Gothic conventions became a form for
expressing fears of the conflicting claims of authority and liberty in
American society--"self-made, self-improved, self-confident men abusing
power or undermining the social order."

· Charles Brockden Brown, Wieland
(1798); Ormond (1799); Edgar Huntly (1799)
	Early 


Nineteenth-

Century 

Novelists	1. James Fenimore Cooper

2. William Gilmore Simms (1806-1870)

· Martin Faber (1833)

· Guy Rivers (1834)

· The Yemassee (1835) 
3. Lydia Maria Child (1802-1880)

· Hobomok (1824)

· The Rebels (1825)

4.
John Neal (1793-1876)

· Logan, A Family History (1822)
(romance of Native American Chief Logan)

· Rachel Dyer (1828) (Salem witchcraft
trials)

· The Down-Easters (1833) (realistic
details about New England)

5. Catharine
Maria Sedgwick (1789-1867) 

· A New England Tale (1822)

· Redwood (1824)

· Hope Leslie (1827)

· The Linwoods (1835)

6. James
Kirke Paulding (1778-1860)

· The Lion of the West (1830) (drama;
introduced the American frontiersman to the stage)

· The Dutchman's Fireside (1831)

· Westward Ho! (1832)

7. Robert
Montgomery Bird (1806-1854)

· Calavar (1834)

· Nick of the Woods  (1837)

8. John
Pendleton Kennedy (1795-1870)

· The Swallow Barn (1832)

	James 
    

    Fenimore 
    

Cooper	[bookmark: James Fenimore]James
Fenimore Cooper (1789-1851)
The Leatherstocking Novels 

 
	The Pioneers	1823 	Leather-Stocking	Natty as an old man	Order for reading the books

4
	The Last of the Mohicans	1826	Hawkeye	Set in 1757; Natty as man in his prime	2
	The Prairie	1827	"The trapper" 	Natty as an old man	5
	The Pathfinder	1840	Pathfinder	Set in 1759; Natty as man in his prime	3
	The Deerslayer	1841	Deerslayer	Natty as a young man	1




Thanks to Hugh MacDougall of the James
Fenimore Cooper Society for clarification on dates and for this comment
from Cooper's 1851 preface to The Pathfinder: "This book should
be the third in the Series of the Leather-Stocking Tales. In The Deerslayer,
Natty Bumppo...is represented as a youth.... In The Last of the Mohicans
he appears as Hawkeye, and is present at the death of young Uncas; while
in this tale [The Pathfinder], he re-appears in the same war of '56....still
in the vigor of manhood...."

Notes on The Pioneers

 Themes and Issues

 A. Portrayals of conflicts:

  1. forces of stability, order, and tradition
against the forces of dynamic change, disruption, and violence.

  2.  patrician ideals of aristocracy
and privilege against the democratic ideals of equality and natural rights

  3.  destructive impulses and consuming
materialism of mob vs. idealism and self-restraint of the enlightened individual. 

 B. Themes

  1. Historical myth and ideology. 

  2. Nature and civilization

  3. Law, power, and property

  4. Land and wilderness; use of the land

  5. Violence

  6. Race

  7. Gender and family; natural aristocracy

The issues of law, property and justice are especially
important in The Pioneers.  Judge Temple gets his land from
a long-lost friend whose property he appropriates; thus he's an illegitimate
holder of it. Cooper is much concerned with law, especially the distinctions
between a natural law based on natural nobility and right (exemplified
by Natty) and the man-made law that rests on judicial entanglements. A
key scene in The Pioneers  is Natty's trial and his response
to the court. Here as elsewhere, he's a figure on the edge of the community
and at odds with it, but here the community holds sway over him; he's diminished
in stature through his contact with it. 

	Commentary	A great obstacle to good education is the inordinate
passion prevalent for novels, and the time lost in that reading which should
be instructively employed.  When this poison infects the mind, it
destroys its tone and revolts it against wholesome reading.  Reason
and fact, plain and unadorned, are rejected.  Nothing can engage attention
unless dressed in all the figments of fancy, and nothing so bedecked comes
amiss.  The result is a bloated imagination, sickly judgment, and
disgust towards all the real businesses of life.  This mass of trash,
however, is not without some distinction; some few modeling their narratives,
although fictitious, on the incidents of real life, have been able to make
them interesting and useful vehicles of a sound morality.  --Thomas
Jefferson
Comments about Novel Readers in
the Nineteenth Century

(from Nina Baym, Novels, Readers, and Reviewers)

Ladies' Repository, January 1845: "It is
romance reading, more than everything else put together, that has so universally
corrupted the tasted of the present age. If a man writes a book-a work
of profound study and solid merit, no body will read it."

Southern Literary Messenger, September
1849: Novel readers are "an enormous class, who have neither leisure, nor
inclination, of graver and more solid studies."

Harper's, June 1853: "Hundreds of readers
who would sleep over a sermon, or drone over an essay, or yield a cold
and barren assent to the deductions of an ethical treatise, will be startled
into reflection, or won to emulation, or roused into effort, by the delineations
they meet with in a tale which they opened only for the amusement of an
hour."




	



To cite this page on a Works Cited page according to
current MLA
guidelines, supply the correct dates and use the suggested format below. 
If you are quoting another author quoted on this page, either look up the
original source information in the bibliography or indicate that original
quotation is cited on  ("Qtd. in") this page. These notes are primarily
derived from the sources listed above; I strongly encourage you to look
up the original sources. 
Campbell, Donna M. "The Early American Novel: Introductory
Notes." Literary Movements. Date of publication or most recent update
(listed below as the "last modified" date; you don't need to indicate the
time). Date you accessed the page. <http://www.wsu.edu/~campbelld/amlit/earamnov.htm>.


    
    

  
About this site





