
    
    

    
        
            
                
                    NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please upgrade your browser.
                    LEARN MORE »
                
            

        

    




    
    
    
        
            Sections
            
                Home
            
            Search
            Skip to content
                        Skip to navigation
                                    View mobile version
                    

        
            
                
                    The New York Times
                
            

            
        

                
            Books|In Vietnam: Stars and Stripes, and Innocence Undone

        

        
            



            





            Search
            
                Subscribe Now
                Log In
                                                0
                Settings
            

        

    

    
    Close search
    
    Site Search Navigation

    
        
            
                                Search NYTimes.com
                            

            
                                
                
                Clear this text input
                
                    

                

                Go
            

        

    






    


            
    
        	
                Loading...

            


        
            
                See next articles
                
                    

                

            
            
                See previous articles
                
                    

                

            
        

    




        
    Site Navigation




    Site Mobile Navigation



    

    
        
    
    Advertisement






        
        

    


                        
    
                                
                            
                    Supported by
                    

                

                                        
                                                                                            Books
                                                                                                                                                                    

                        			In Vietnam: Stars and Stripes, and Innocence Undone

	                                                
                
    
                Books of The Times            

    By                     
                                    MICHIKO KAKUTANI
                            
                AUG. 31, 2007
    



                                                
                                    
                        
Continue reading the main story
Share This Page

Continue reading the main story




                                                                                                

                                            

        

    

    

        
    
    
        
    Photo
    
            [image: ]
            




Denis Johnson
                        
            Credit
            Cindy Johnson        
            
    

Denis Johnson’s wildly ambitious new novel, “Tree of Smoke,” reads like a whacked-out, hallucinogenic variation on such whacked-out, hallucinogenic Vietnam classics as Francis Ford Coppola’s “Apocalypse Now,” Michael Herr’s “Dispatches,” Robert Stone’s “Dog Soldiers” and Stephen Wright’s “Meditations in Green.” It features a central character who comes to see himself as a combination of the Quiet American and the Ugly American, and another who comes across as a latter-day version of Kurtz in Conrad’s “Heart of Darkness.”
What’s amazing is that Mr. Johnson somehow manages to take these derivative elements and turn them into something highly original  —  and potent. Though “Tree of Smoke” is hobbled by a plot that starts and stops and lurches wildly about, it’s a powerful story about the American experience in Vietnam, with unsettling echoes of the current American experience in Iraq. It is a story about bad intelligence and military screw-ups and people who have lost their way, a story like so many of Mr. Johnson’s earlier novels, about Americans in purgatory, waiting impatiently, even expectantly, for the coming apocalypse.
This has been Mr. Johnson’s preoccupation throughout his career, from early, incantatory books like “Angels” and “Fiskadoro” through later, tendentious works like “Already Dead.” Whether the backdrop is a futuristic United States (“Fiskadoro”), Nicaragua in the 1980s (“The Stars at Noon”), or, in the case of this latest novel, Vietnam in the 1960s, he has consistently promoted a vision of America as a country in the grip of misplaced dreams and outright delusions, intent on exporting its madness abroad. His cast of characters, too, is similar from book to book: an alarming spectrum of madmen and deadbeats and drifters —  the lost, the damned and the dispossessed — all yearning for salvation or release.
In “Tree of Smoke,” Skip Sands initially seems like a very different sort of Johnsonian hero. Skip is young, naïve and eager to prove himself as a C.I.A. operative. He is convinced that the United States is going to defeat the Communists in Vietnam and wants to be there for that victory. And he hopes to emulate his larger-than-life uncle, Col. Francis Sands, a Flying Tiger who escaped from the Japanese during World War II and made a swaggering legend of himself.

    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story


Most of all, Skip believes in the goodness and promise of America with boyish innocence and ardor: “In the Stars and Stripes,” Mr. Johnson writes, “all the passions of his life coalesced to produce the ache with which he loved the United States of America  —  with which he loved the dirty, plain, honest faces of G.I.’s in the photographs of World War II, with which he loved the sheets of rain rippling across the green playing field toward the end of the school year, with which he cherished the sense-memories of the summers of his childhood.”

    Photo
    
            [image: ]
            
Tree of Smoke by Denis Johnson. 
                        
            Credit
            Lars Klove for The New York Times        
            
    
Skip’s innocence, however, is tarnished when he witnesses the agency’s brutal assassination of a priest (falsely suspected of running guns) in the Philippines, and in Vietnam he quickly becomes lost in the wilderness of mirrors created by his fellow intelligence officers. He is drawn willy-nilly into a complicated plot involving a double agent  — a Vietcong sympathizer, who apparently agrees to carry out a mission for the Americans  — and finds himself increasingly unable to distinguish between the good guys and the bad guys, the earnest and the duplicitous, the idealistic and the mercenary.
        Continue reading the main story
    
    
    



    
    
    Advertisement



Continue reading the main story
    






    
        As for Skip’s mentor, the colonel, he too loses his way  or, rather, comes to believe that his superiors have lost their way. In a secret memo he suggests that the intelligence functions of the agency are being perverted, that they are being used to “provide rationalizations for policy,”  much the way flawed intelligence was used, in the walk-up to the Iraq war, to provide a rationale for invasion.
Eventually, he concocts an elaborate plan to test his hypotheses, a plan that will make him the target of some of his own colleagues. For that matter, the colonel and Skip both learn that they can trust no one, least of all those who are supposedly their comrades-in-arms in the cold war.

    Newsletter Sign Up

    Continue reading the main story
        
        
    
    
        
            
                Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.

                Invalid email address. Please re-enter.

                You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.

            

            
                
                Sign Up
            

        

        
            
                
            

            
                You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.
            

        

        

    

    
        Thank you for subscribing.

        An error has occurred. Please try again later.

        You are already subscribed to this email.

        View all New York Times newsletters.

    

    	See Sample
	Manage Email Preferences
	Not you?
	Privacy Policy
	Opt out or contact us anytime


    




Mr. Johnson intercuts the stories of Skip and the colonel with those of half a dozen other people caught up in the war. There’s James Houston, a young drifter who has followed his brother into the military and finds himself in the midst of a war with no rules, a war in which the heat and the jungle and the confusions of fighting a guerrilla enemy lead to acts of startling brutality and horror. There’s Kathy Jones, a nurse who winds up in Vietnam after her husband, a missionary, is killed, and who has a brief, seemingly desultory, affair with Skip. And there’s Hao, a Vietnamese functionary, who dreams of a better life in Singapore or the United States, and uses his boyhood friendship with a member of the Vietcong to try to advance his interests with the Americans.
Mr. Johnson’s orchestration of these characters’ intersecting lives is often graceless —  as his last couple of novels have demonstrated, plotting has never been one of his strengths  — and he has an unfortunate tendency to embroider their adventures with lots of portentous philosophizing about good and evil and religious faith. His heat-seeking eye for detail and his ability to render those observations in hot, tactile prose, however, immerse us so thoroughly in the fetid world of the war and the even more noxious world of espionage that they effectively erase the book’s occasional longueurs.
Mr. Johnson not only succeeds in conjuring the anomalous, hallucinatory aura of the Vietnam War as authoritatively as Stephen Wright or Francis Ford Coppola, but he also shows its fallout on his characters with harrowing emotional precision. He has written a flawed but deeply resonant novel that is bound to become one of the classic works of literature produced by that tragic and uncannily familiar war.


TREE OF SMOKE

By Denis Johnson

614 pages. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $27. 






    
                Follow Michiko Kakutani on Twitter: @michikokakutani


        
        
        A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E25 of the New York edition with the headline: In Vietnam: Stars and Stripes, and Innocence Undone.   Today's Paper|Subscribe




    

    
        Continue reading the main story
    

    
    




    
    

    We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.





    
        
    
    

    	
	
	
	






    
    
                
                        
                
                    Books of The Times

                    Book reviews by The Times’s critics.

                

            

            

        
        	
    
        
            
                                ‘Barracoon’ and ‘Slave Old Man’ Approach the Trauma of Slavery With Care and Kinship            
            MAY 2
        

    


	
    
        
            
                                In ‘The Moralist,’ Woodrow Wilson and the Hazards of Idealism            
            MAY 1
        

    


	
    
        
            
                                To Make Someone Be or Not to Make Someone Be            
            APR 30
        

    


	
    
        
            
                                A True-Crime Mystery From the 1950s, Fueled by Racism and Corruption            
            APR 25
        

    


	
    
        
            
                                In a Raft of New Books, Motherhood From (Almost) Every Angle            
            APR 24
        

    




        
            See More »

        
    




    




    What's Next

    
        
            Loading...

        

    






           
 



                    

            
            
    
        Go to Home Page »

        
            Site Index
            
                The New York Times
            
        

        
    

    
        Site Index Navigation

        

                                                        
                    
                        News

                        	
                                        World
                                    
	
                                        U.S.
                                    
	
                                        Politics
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.
                                    
	
                                        Business
                                    
	
                                        Tech
                                    
	
                                        Science
                                    
	
                                        Health
                                    
	
                                        Sports
                                    
	
                                        Education
                                    
	
                                        Obituaries
                                    
	
                                        Today's Paper
                                    
	
                                        Corrections
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Opinion

                        	
                                        Today's Opinion
                                    
	
                                        Op-Ed Columnists
                                    
	
                                        Editorials
                                    
	
                                        Op-Ed Contributors
                                    
	
                                        Letters
                                    
	
                                        Sunday Review
                                    
	
                                        Video: Opinion
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Arts

                        	
                                        Today's Arts
                                    
	
                                        Art & Design
                                    
	
                                        Books
                                    
	
                                        Dance
                                    
	
                                        Movies
                                    
	
                                        Music
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Television
                                    
	
                                        Theater
                                    
	
                                        Video: Arts
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Living

                        	
                                        Automobiles
                                    
	
                                        Crossword
                                    
	
                                        Food
                                    
	
                                        Education
                                    
	
                                        Fashion & Style
                                    
	
                                        Health
                                    
	
                                        Jobs
                                    
	
                                        Magazine
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Real Estate
                                    
	
                                        T Magazine
                                    
	
                                        Travel
                                    
	
                                        Weddings & Celebrations
                                    


                    


                                            
                    
                        Listings & More

                        	
                                        Reader Center
                                    
	
                                        Classifieds
                                    
	
                                        Tools & Services
                                    
	
                                        N.Y.C. Events Guide
                                    
	
                                        Multimedia
                                    
	
                                        Photography
                                    
	
                                        Video
                                    
	
                                        NYT Store
                                    
	
                                        Times Journeys
                                    
	
                                        Subscribe
                                    
	
                                        Manage My Account
                                    
	
                                        NYTCo
                                    


                    


                            
            
                
Subscribe


	Subscribe
	
        
                    Home Delivery
            
	
        
                    Digital Subscriptions
            
	
        
        Crossword
    



	
        Email Newsletters
    
	
        Alerts
    
	
                    Gift Subscriptions
            
	
                    Group Subscriptions
            
	
                    Education Rate
            


	
        Mobile Applications
    
	
                    Replica Edition
            


            


        


    



            
    
        Site Information Navigation

         	
                
                    © 2018 The New York Times Company

	Home
	Search
	Accessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.
	Contact Us
	Work With Us
	Advertise
	Your Ad Choices
	Privacy
	Terms of Service
	Terms of Sale


    
    
        Site Information Navigation

        	Site Map
	Help
	Site Feedback
	Subscriptions


    

        
    
    
            
    


    



















