[image: DHQ Logo]
[image: Digital Humanities Quarterly Logo]

homesubmissionsabout dhqdhq peoplecontact
 




Current Issue
	2017: 11.4

Preview Issue
	2018: 12.1

Previous Issues
	2017: 11.3
	2017: 11.2
	2017: 11.1
	2016: 10.4
	2016: 10.3
	2016: 10.2
	2016: 10.1
	2015: 9.4
	2015: 9.3
	2015: 9.2
	2015: 9.1
	2014: 8.4
	2014: 8.3
	2014: 8.2
	2014: 8.1
	2013: 7.3
	2013: 7.2
	2013: 7.1
	2012: 6.3
	2012: 6.2
	2012: 6.1
	2011: 5.3
	2011: 5.2
	2011: 5.1
	2010: 4.2
	2010: 4.1
	2009: 3.4
	2009: 3.3
	2009: 3.2
	2009: 3.1
	2008: 2.1
	2007: 1.2
	2007: 1.1

Indexes
	 Title
	 Author


[image: sidenavbarimg]ISSN 1938-4122

Announcements
	Call for Reviewers
	Call for Submissions


[image: button1-addthis.gif]

DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly
Author Biographies
Florentina Armaselu Florentina Armaselu is a research scientist at the Centre for
                            Contemporary and Digital History (C2DH) of the University of Luxembourg.
                            With a background in Computer Science, literature and linguistics, her
                            research focuses on text encoding, digital scholarly editions, text
                            analysis, and Human Computer Interaction.
Natalie Berkman Natalie Berkman is a doctoral candidate in the Department of French and
                            Italian at Princeton University, currently working on her dissertation
                            on the mathematical methods of the Oulipo under the direction of
                            Professor David Bellos. An associated member of the ANR DifdePo, she is
                            also coordinator of the transcription team for the Oulipo archival
                            transcription project. Her dissertation examines various branches of
                            mathematical thought — set theory, algebra, combinatorics, algorithms,
                            and geometry — on the philosophy and production of the Oulipo and the
                            reception of Oulipian texts. She is currently working on completing one
                            of the Princeton Center for Digital Humanities inaugural projects for
                            the 2015-6 academic year, which consists of digital annexes for her
                            dissertation that she is programming herself in Python.
Rhiannon Stephanie Bettivia Rhiannon Bettivia is a postdoctoral research associate at the University
                            of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. Her research examines the politics and
                            discourses of the growing sub-field of digital preservation and
                            investigates new methodologies for preserving the interpretive framework
                            for digital materials. She has published in the International Journal of Digital Curation about her work on
                            the IMLS grant Preserving Virtual Worlds
                            II, among other publications and presentations in the fields of
                            information science, digital humanities, and communications. She also
                            teaches in the areas of digital preservation, metadata, and the role of
                            libraries and information in society in the School of Information
                            Sciences at the University of Illinois.
Antonis Bikakis Antonis Bikakis is a senior lecturer of Computing and Artificial
                            Intelligence in the Department of Information Studies of University
                            College London (UCL) and co-director of its Knowledge Organisation and
                            Representation Group. His main research interests are in knowledge
                            representation, nonmonotonic reasoning, argumentation, multi-agent
                            systems and knowledge-based systems for the Semantic Web and Ambient
                            Intelligence. He has participated in various EU-funded and national
                            research projects. He is currently Principal Investigator in CrossCult,
                            a research project funded by the European Commission’s Horizon 2020
                            initiative, which uses Semantic Web and other cutting-edge technology to
                            connect digital cultural resources lying in different cultural heritage
                            venues across Europe. 
Andrew Bretz Department of English and Film Studies, Contract Faculty
Mattie Burkert Mattie Burkert is an Assistant Professor of English at Utah State
                            University.
Alison Caplan  Alison Caplan is an Assistant Professor of Spanish at Providence
                            College, focusing on Medieval and Golden Age Spanish history and
                            literature.
Anela Chan Anela Chan is a Data Scientist in Analytics at the social
                            network/blogging platform Tumblr. Previously she was Lead Data Scientist
                            at the marketing tech startup Contently and a Senior Economic Analyst at
                            the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Anela built "Sonic Japan" while undertaking the Master of Information
                            Technology course with a specialty in Computing at the University of
                            Melbourne School of Engineering.
Richard Chenhall  Richard Chenhall is Associate Professor in Medical Anthropology in the
                            Melbourne School of Population Health at the University of Melbourne. In
                            addition to scholarly articles that focus on alcohol self help groups in
                            Japan and health and illness in Indigenous Australia, his major
                            publications include Benelong’s Haven
                            (2007), Social Determinants of Health
                            (2007) and Sleep Around the World (2013).
                        
Caitlin Christian-Lamb Christian-Lamb is the Associate Archivist of Davidson College, a Review
                            Editor for dh+lib, and co-chair of the Society of American Archivists
                            Standards Committee.
Alex Christie Alex Christie is Assistant Professor in Digital Prototyping at Brock
                            University's Centre for Digital Humanities. His research draws from
                            modernist practice to experiment with digital knowledge production,
                            including recovering manuscripts as game-based reading experiences and
                            warping historical maps to express diverse representations of space. He
                            led the Pegagogy Toolkit project with microgrant funding from the
                            Association for Computers and the Humanities. 
Eric Dye Eric Dye is a photographer, graphics designer, and journalist. While
                            pursuing liberal studies at Penn State Behrend, he also worked at The
                            Behrend Beacon as the Creative Director and Opinion Editor. He is
                            currently a Projectionist at the Tom Ridge Environmental Center in Erie,
                            Pennsylvania.
                            
Laura Estill  Laura Estill is an Associate Professor of English at Texas A&M
                            University. Her research has appeared journals such as Digital
                            Studies/Champ Numérique, Digital Literary Studies, Shakespeare
                            Quarterly, and Studies in English Literature. Her monograph, Dramatic Extracts in Seventeenth-Century English
                                Manuscripts: Watching, Reading, Changing Plays appeared in
                            2015 to positive reviews.
Calvin Fung Calvin Fung is currently pursuing a PhD in Creative Writing. His thesis
                            includes a creative component in the form of a Gothic novel set in Hong
                            Kong and a critical component examining the way in which the cultural
                            specificity of Hong Kong interacts with the Gothic genre to extend the
                            postcolonial Gothic and Asian Gothic spectra. His research interests
                            include interdisciplinary narratology, Gothic literary studies and
                            postcolonial studies.
Nuria Alonso García Nuria Alonso Garcia is a civically engaged educator in the fields of
                            linguistics, global studies and urban education. Her research revolves
                            around intercultural literacy and TESOL. Her engaged pedagogy strives to
                            develop service and experiential learning initiatives that address how
                            issues of international resonance intersect with concerns experienced by
                            local communities. She has led community engagement projects in Mexico
                            and Nicaragua and engaged with learners and scholars from Russia during
                            her Fulbright appointment at the Saint Petersburg State Polytechnical
                            University Institute of Humanities, where she is currently a visiting
                            professor.
Dene Grigar writing, content analysis, annotation, cleanup, editing, commenting,
                            teaching, and collaboration
Jacob Heil writing, annotation, cleanup, editing, contextualizing, commenting, and
                            collaboration
Charles van den Heuvel Charles van den Heuvel is Head Research of History of Science and
                            Scholarship at the Huygens Institute for the History of the Netherlands
                            of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in Amsterdam.
                            Furthermore, he holds the chair: "Digital Methods
                                and Historical Disciplines" at the University of
                            Amsterdam.
Kate Holterhoff Kate Holterhoff is a Marion L. Brittain Postdoctoral Fellow at the
                            Georgia Institute of Technology. Her research areas include
                            nineteenth-century British literature, visual culture, digital
                            humanities, and the history of science. She has published articles in
                                English Literature in Transition,
                                1880-1920 (forthcoming), The Journal of
                                Victorian Culture, The Journal of the
                                History of Biology, and Victorian
                                Network.
Patricia Hswe Patricia Hswe is the Program Officer for Scholarly Communications at the
                            Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. In this role, she helps manage and monitor
                            the program’s grant portfolio, which addresses key areas such as
                            preservation, electronic publishing, and access and library services.
                            Patricia holds a MSLIS from the University of Illinois at
                            Urbana-Champaign, a PhD from Yale University, and an AB from Mount
                            Holyoke College. She is active in the Association of College and
                            Research Libraries and was recently elected to the Executive Council of
                            the Association for Computers and the Humanities.
Bridget Jenkins Bridget Jenkins graduated from Penn State Behrend with a BA in English
                            and Professional Writing major in the spring of 2016. She also served as
                            the Managing Editor at her college newspaper, The Behrend Beacon. She is
                            currently a Technical Recruiter for All Lines Technology in West Palm
                            Beach, Florida.
                            
Janelle Jenstad Associate Professor, University of Victoria; Director, Map of Early
                            Modern London
Wooseob Jeong Dean and Richel Distinguished Professor, School of Library and
                            Information Management (founded in 1902), Emporia State University
                            (founded in 1863) 
Shannon Kelley English Department, Assistant Professor
Kara Kennedy Kara Kennedy is a PhD Candidate in English focusing on science fiction
                            and feminism in the twentieth century, as well as Digital Humanities in
                            relation to science fiction and education.
Kimmo Kettunen National Library of Finland · Centre for Digitization and
                            Preservation
Tamara Kohn  Tamara Kohn is Associate Professor of Anthropology (in the School of
                            Social and Political Sciences) and Coordinator of Gender Studies (in the
                            Faculty of Arts) at Melbourne University. Her research has been focused
                            on death studies, incarceration and personhood, communities of practice
                            (from caring practices to moving arts), ethics, and the anthropology of
                            the body and senses. Her most recent publications include Death and Digital Media (Routledge 2017,
                            co-authored), "On the Shifting Ethics and Contexts
                                of Knowledge Production" in The Ethics
                                of Knowledge Creation (Berghahn 2017), and a book chapter
                            associated with the Sonic Japan project, co-authored with Chenhall -
                                "Being in Sound" in Collaborative Intimacies in Music and Dance (Berghahn
                            2017). 
Juha Kuokkala University of Helsinki, Department of Finnish, Nordic and Finno-Ugric
                            Studies
Ioanna Kyvernitou Ioanna Kyvernitou is a PhD candidate in Digital Arts and Humanities at
                            the National University of Ireland, Galway. Her research explores ways
                            of combining women’s studies, history of philosophy and ontology
                            engineering in order to model information contained in early modern
                            women’s works related to philosophical issues. 
Tara LaLonde Tara LaLonde is a GIS Specialist at Penn State University Libraries. She
                            has a Master of Science in Geography from Michigan State University, and
                            a Bachelor of Arts in Geography from Colgate University. Prior to
                            working at the University Libraries, she worked in the geospatial
                            technology industry.
Brandon T. Locke Brandon Locke is a Digital Humanities and Social Science Specialist in
                            the Department of History at Michigan State University, and is Director
                            of the Lab for the Education and Advancement in Digital Research
                            (LEADR).
Laura Löfberg Department of Linguistics and English Language, Lancaster University,
                            UK
Simon Mahony Simon Mahony is Principal Teaching Fellow and Programme Director of the
                            MA/MSc in Digital Humanities at the Department of Information Studies,
                            University College London (UCL) and Associate Director for Teaching at
                            the UCL Centre for Digital Humanities (UCLDH). He teaches a range of
                            technical and non-technical modules and has current research interests
                            in the application of new technologies to the study of the ancient
                            world, using new web based mechanisms and digital resources to build and
                            sustain learning communities, collaborative an innovative working. He is
                            also active in the field of distance learning, a member of the
                            University of London's Centre for Distance Education, an Associate
                            Fellow at the Institute of Classical Studies (School of Advance Study,
                            University of London) and one of the founding organisers of the Digital
                            Classicist. 
Aaron Mauro Dr. Aaron Mauro is Assistant Professor of Digital Humanities and English
                            at Penn State Behrend. He is the director of the Penn State Digital
                            Humanities Lab and teaches on topics relating to digital culture,
                            computational text analysis, and scholarly communication. His articles
                            on U.S. literature and culture have appeared in Modern Fiction Studies,
                            Mosaic, and Symploke among others. He has also published on issues
                            relating to digital humanities in both Digital Studies and Digital
                            Humanities Quarterly.
                            
Jim McGrath Jim McGrath is currently a postdoctoral fellow in Digital Public
                            Humanities at the John Nicholas Brown Center for Public Humanities and
                            Cultural Heritage, Brown University. He is on Twitter @JimMc_Grath.
Kim McLean-Fiander Assistant Teaching Professor, University of Victoria; Director of
                            Pedagogy and Outreach, Map of Early Modern London
Kathryn R. McPherson Professor of English, Utah Valley University
Brad Mering Brad Mering is a Web Developer specializing in applications designed for
                            teaching and researching in the humanities.
Kate Miffitt Kate Miffitt is Assistant Director of the Office of Digital Learning in
                            the College of Arts & Architecture at the Pennsylvania State
                            University. Her work includes identifying and developing new online
                            programs and enhancing teaching and learning with technology, with a
                            focus on arts and humanities pedagogies.  
Emily Christina Murphy Dr. Emily Christina Murphy is a postdoctoral fellow with the Linked
                            Modernisms Project at the University of Victoria. From 2013-2015 she was
                            instructor and Assistant Director at the Field School in Digital
                            Humanities at the Bader International Study Centre (UK), Queen's
                            University (Canada). She teaches introductory topics across the DH
                            training network and undergraduate and graduate courses in modernist
                            literature, social networks in literature, and digital humanities
                            practice. Her published writing includes articles on Samuel Beckett and
                            a digital monograph on Canadian women journalists in the Spanish Civil
                            War with the archival recovery project, Canada and the Spanish Civil
                            War. 
Eetu Mäkelä Assistant Professor in Digital Humanities, University of Helsinki
James O'Sullivan James O’Sullivan is Lecturer in Digital Arts & Humanities at
                            University College Cork (National University of Ireland). He has
                            previously held faculty positions at the University of Sheffield and
                            Pennsylvania State University. His work has been published in a variety
                            of interdisciplinary journals, including Digital Scholarship in the
                            Humanities, Digital Humanities Quarterly, Leonardo, and Hyperrhiz: New
                            Media Cultures. He is the co-editor of Reading Modernism with Machines
                            (Palgrave Macmillan 2016). James is Associate Director of the Digital
                            Humanities Summer Institute, as well as Chair of the DHSI Colloquium.
                            Further information on James and his work can be found at josullivan.org.
Miriam Peña Pimentel Lecturer at the Faculty of Philosophy and Literature, UNAM
Sarah Pickle Sarah Pickle (UNC 2005) is the assessment librarian at the Claremont
                            Colleges Library. In that role, she designs and coordinates projects
                            related to organizational effectiveness and planning at the Library. She
                            came to Claremont after serving as the Council on Library and
                            Information Resources Social Science Data Curation Fellow at Penn State
                            Libraries. She began her fellowship in 2014, after working for two years
                            as an analyst at the not-for-profit organization Ithaka S+R; there, her
                            research focused on the efforts academic and cultural heritage
                            institutions are making to create and sustain digital resources and
                            services for scholars today. Prior to joining Ithaka S+R, she completed
                            her PhD in comparative literature at Cornell University.
Nathan Piekielek Nathan Piekielek is the Geospatial Services Librarian at The Pennsylvania
                            State University. He works in the University Libraries Research Hub
                            where he supports the use of geospatial technologies across the
                            university. 
Sarah Potvin discovering, gathering, writing, cleanup, editing, theorizing,
                            collaboration, commenting, and contextualizing
Daniel Powell writing, content analysis, project management, annotation, cleanup,
                            editing, commenting, community building, and collaboration
Heather Ross Heather Dohn Ross holds a BS and MS in Experimental Psychology from
                            Syracuse University.  She is the Manager of the Donald W. Hamer Center
                            for Maps and Geospatial Information. 
Albert Rozo Albert Rozo is the Preservation Data Specialist in the Preservation,
                            Conservation, and Digitization Department at Penn State University
                            Libraries. Prior to working at the Library, Albert worked in a variety
                            of positions in the Chemistry, Entomology, and Information Technology
                            Departments' at Penn State. Albert is a Licensed Architect in the State
                            of Illinois. He has a BS in Architecture and is currently working
                            towards an MS in Geographic Information Systems. 
Teemu Ruokolainen Language technology consultant for Digital Collections project
Alex Saum-Pascual Alex Saum-Pascual is Assistant Professor of Spanish at the University of California, Berkeley, where she teaches
                            Contemporary Spanish Literature and Culture (20th and 21st Centuries)
                            and Electronic Literature (Digital Humanities). She is also part of the
                            Executive Committee of the Berkeley Center for New Media. Her academic work has been
                            published in Spain, Mexico and the United States. Her digital artwork
                            has been exhibited in galleries and art festivals in the United States
                            and abroad.
Danica Savonick Danica Savonick is a PhD candidate in English and a Futures Initiative
                            Fellow at the CUNY Graduate Center and a Teaching Fellow at Queens
                            College. Her dissertation, The Promise of Aesthetic
                                Education: On Pedagogy, Praxis, and Social Justice analyzes
                            the feminist and antiracist pedagogies of Adrienne Rich, Audre Lorde,
                            June Jordan, and Toni Cade Bambara, all of whom taught in the SEEK
                            educational opportunity program at the City University of New York in
                            the late 1960s and 1970s. Her research interests include 20th century
                            and contemporary literary studies, pedagogy, and social justice.
Anelise Hanson Shrout Anelise Hanson Shrout is an assistant professor of history at California
                            State University Fullerton. Prior to CSUF, Shrout was a postdoctoral
                            fellow in digital Studies at Davidson College.
Shannon R. Smith Shannon R. Smith is Assistant Professor of English Literature at the
                            Bader International Study Centre (UK), Queen’s University (Canada). From
                            2013-2015 she served as the Director of the BISC’s Field School in the
                            Digital Humanities. Her research is concerned with histories of
                            nineteenth- and twentieth-century communication and print production
                            technologies, the Internet and World Wide Web, and the intersection
                            between Digital Humanities maker culture and
                            participatory art. She has also published articles on literary theory,
                            and Victorian popular theatre, sport, and urban spaces. 
Elizabeth Stainforth Elizabeth Stainforth is a Visiting Research Fellow in the School of Fine
                            Art, History of Art and Cultural Studies, University of Leeds, UK. Her
                            research investigates digital heritage cultures and the contemporary
                            significance of memory for cultural heritage in the wake of digital
                            technologies. She has published in the journals Museum and Society,
                            Cultural Trends and The Journal of Curatorial Studies, among others, and
                            is one of the editors of parallax journal. She also works for Leeds
                            University Library, where she has been involved in projects with the
                            Digital Content and Repositories Team, Special Collections and the
                            Stanley & Audrey Burton Gallery.
Carolyn Stevens  Carolyn S. Stevens is Professor of Japanese Studies and Director of the
                            Japanese Studies Centre at Monash University. Her recent major
                            publications include Japanese Popular Music:
                                Culture, Authenticity and Power (Routledge, 2008), Disability in Japan (Routledge, 2013) and
                                The Beatles in Japan (2018), as well as
                            the co-edited volumes Sound, Space and Sociality in
                                Modern Japan (2014) and Internationalising Japan (2014). She
                            is currently Editor in Chief of the interdisciplinary journal Japanese Studies.
Lisa Tagliaferri Lisa Tagliaferri holds a PhD in Comparative Literature from the Graduate
                            Center of the City University of New York, an MSc in Computing and
                            Information Systems from the University of London, and an MA from
                            Binghamton University. Lisa’s research focuses on early modern
                            literature and digital pedagogy, and she currently works with the
                            Mellon-funded CUNY Humanities Alliance. 
Marinella Testori Marinella Testori is a Digital Humanist with specialism in linguistic
                            annotation and lexicography for Latin. Since 2010 she has been
                            collaborating as Linguistic Annotator of the Index Thomisticus Treebank
                            Project (http://itreebank.marginalia.it/), and since 2017 as
                            Lexicographer at the CIRCSE (Catholic University of Milan, Italy). She
                            received two MM.AA. in Humanities and Historical Sciences at the
                            Catholic University of Milan, a Biblical Diploma at the Pontifical
                            University of the Holy Cross in Rome, and a postgraduate degree in Text
                            Informatics and Digital Scholarly Edition at the University of
                            Arezzo-Siena (Italy). She is currently working on her Ph.D. dissertation
                            regarding corpus linguistics methods applied to the language of Thomas
                            Aquinas at the Department of Digital Humanities at King’s College
                            London.
Adriana Álvarez Sánchez Associate Profesor at the Faculty of Philosophy and Literature, UNAM 
 
            URL: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/bios.html
Last updated:
            
 Comments: dhqinfo@digitalhumanities.org
 Published by:
            The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
Affiliated with: Literary and Linguistic Computing
 Copyright 2005 - 
[image: Creative Commons License]
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
        


