[image: DHQ Logo]
[image: Digital Humanities Quarterly Logo]

homesubmissionsabout dhqdhq peoplecontact
 




Current Issue
	2017: 11.4

Preview Issue
	2018: 12.1

Previous Issues
	2017: 11.3
	2017: 11.2
	2017: 11.1
	2016: 10.4
	2016: 10.3
	2016: 10.2
	2016: 10.1
	2015: 9.4
	2015: 9.3
	2015: 9.2
	2015: 9.1
	2014: 8.4
	2014: 8.3
	2014: 8.2
	2014: 8.1
	2013: 7.3
	2013: 7.2
	2013: 7.1
	2012: 6.3
	2012: 6.2
	2012: 6.1
	2011: 5.3
	2011: 5.2
	2011: 5.1
	2010: 4.2
	2010: 4.1
	2009: 3.4
	2009: 3.3
	2009: 3.2
	2009: 3.1
	2008: 2.1
	2007: 1.2
	2007: 1.1

Indexes
	 Title
	 Author


[image: sidenavbarimg]ISSN 1938-4122

Announcements
	Call for Reviewers
	Call for Submissions


[image: button1-addthis.gif]

DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly
2017
Volume 11 Number 3
2017 11.3
                     | 
                    XML

| 
		   Discuss
			(
				Comments
			)
                



    
        
            
                
                A Long-Belated Welcome: Accepting Digital Humanities Methods
                    into Non-DH Classrooms

                Kara Kennedy <dunescholar_at_gmail_dot_com>, University of Canterbury

            
            
            
        
        
        
        
     

    
        
            Abstract

                
                Digital Humanities (DH) methods incorporated into traditional (non-DH) humanities
                    classrooms present a fruitful opportunity to help undergraduate students learn
                    digital literacy skills as well as new ways of studying the humanities. In light
                    of the trend of increasing numbers of women entering higher education and
                    choosing humanities and arts degrees, DH can also help women who potentially
                    face gender biases related to digital technology gain competence and confidence
                    with it through their humanities courses. Having more students introduced to DH
                    as a regular part of study may increase diversity in the DH community when they
                    themselves become teachers and researchers. Barriers exist, from reluctance to
                    change to a rising contingent labor force. Therefore, this article offers a
                    selection of accessible DH methods that can be used to positively shape
                    humanities pedagogy.

            

            
        
        
            1
As a graduate student in English Literature, I was one of the lucky ones: my first
                teaching assistant experience came in a new English course that included a component
                related to Digital Humanities (DH)–a public blog–as part of its assessment. I had
                never encountered DH in my humanities degree programs at previous universities, but
                I soon found myself investigating other ways of integrating DH into traditional
                undergraduate courses to better prepare students with digital literacy skills for
                the 21st-century information society and show them new ways of studying their
                favorite subjects. My research has led me to the conclusion that incorporating DH
                methods into non-DH classrooms is more than pedagogically important–it is an ethical
                duty and a feminist imperative. Humanities students need digital literacy
                skills–including the women who make up the majority of such students and potentially
                face gender biases related to digital technology and computing culture–and DH tools
                and methods are well-oriented toward the development of these skills within the
                context of the humanities. 

            2
First, a definition of terms is needed to clarify what is meant by Digital
                Humanities, digital pedagogy, and digital literacy. Digital Humanities involves the
                production and use of digital technologies for new types of teaching and research in
                the humanities (English, history, philosophy, and related fields) and/or computer
                science and a critical perspective on such technologies [Terras 2011].
                Digital pedagogy is the use of digital technology in teaching and learning along
                with a critical reflection on how it can improve these activities [Digital Pedgagogy? 2013]. Definitions of digital literacy range from
                having a general proficiency with digital technology to being able to “identify, access, manage, integrate, evaluate, analyze and
                        synthesize digital resources, construct new knowledge, create media
                        expressions, and communicate with others”
                     [Martin 2008]. In “Reconceptualising critical digital literacy”
                Luciana Pangrazio acknowledges that the fast-changing nature of digital practices
                means that students need to develop a critical disposition transferable across
                digital contexts rather than just learn how to use a new piece of technology. This
                definition of critical digital literacy thus encompasses both technical skills and “an understanding of the role humans play in questioning,
                        challenging and therefore shaping this techno-social system”
                     [Pangrazio 2016, 169]. There is a clear overlap between Digital Humanities, digital pedagogy, and
                digital literacy, especially regarding the importance of critically analyzing
                technology while engaging with it. This article takes a broad, inclusive view of
                what constitutes DH tools and methods and aims to be accessible to those without
                programming knowledge. Ultimately, it is for teachers to decide which aspects of
                Digital Humanities will allow them to best engage in digital pedagogy and foster
                critical digital literacy skills in their students. 

            3
My initial review of the field of DH found relatively few materials on pedagogy, or
                how a teacher new to these ideas might be able to benefit from all of the
                interesting and exciting knowledge emerging from the DH community. Articles on
                pedagogy in Digital Humanities-specific books and journals–including Digital Humanities Quarterly, The
                    Journal of Digital Humanities, Digital Humanities
                    Pedagogy, and Debates in the Digital
                    Humanities–tend to focus on classes already identified as belonging to
                the field of Digital Humanities or ones housed within departments working on DH
                research projects. Some assume a level of familiarity with DH concepts that may
                discourage newcomers from engaging with the digital technology presented. However,
                when I followed the articles’ references to blog posts on scholars’ websites and on
                networks like HASTAC[1], I found resources on teaching that seem
                better suited to those new to DH. I extended my search to the relatively new online
                journals Hybrid Pedagogy and The
                    Journal of Interactive Technology and Pedagogy, which seek to help
                teachers navigate the shifting landscape of digital media, and other scholarly
                resources on technology in the field of education. These present numerous calls for
                digital pedagogy and literacy[2] to prepare students for
                the 21st century, but their broader scope may mean they are missed by those
                searching for humanities-specific resources. 

            4
Although many DH research projects focus on literary studies or are housed in English
                    departments[3], I found that there
                remains a lack of resources surrounding how DH might transform the traditional
                undergraduate classroom in my own field of English. One of the most accessible
                resources I encountered was a special issue of The CEA Critic
                on Digital Humanities pedagogy by the College English Association in the
                U.S. in 2014. One of its editors acknowledges that “very few texts address how
                    teachers can apply DH in literature classrooms” and “[f]or most English faculty, DH as a field remains uncharted
                        territory”
                     [Iantorno 2014, 140–141]. The issue includes an overview of DH undergraduate pedagogy and five case
                studies from English teachers who have incorporated varying degrees of DH into their
                classrooms. The issue’s strengths are that it targets English teachers, focuses on
                undergraduate pedagogy, and presents DH as a helpful and enjoyable accompaniment to
                traditional teaching techniques. In a similar vein, the Digital
                    Pedagogy in the Humanities collection curated by the Modern Language
                Association (MLA) seeks to appeal to both experienced and novice humanities teachers
                and addresses the need for more scholarly examples of digital pedagogy.[4] Instead of offering more text-based essays, it provides an
                open-access, born-digital collection of pedagogical resources sorted by keywords
                like “hybrid” and “rhetoric”. Although
                keywords are not specific to nor organized by traditional disciplines by design, the
                fact that they are in an MLA publication signals their importance and relevance to
                the field of English.

            5
Yet despite relatively easy access to the resources listed, traditional humanities
                students and teachers may be unaware of them[5] if they are not
                specifically searching for content with the keyword ‘digital’, and they may still be
                hesitant about a departure from familiar research and teaching practices, especially
                if it seems like they need to become masters of digital technology and learn how to
                use seemingly complicated software programs. This foreshadows a continuing lack of
                changes in pedagogy if humanities teachers do not use digital pedagogy and include
                digital literacy as a core competency and thus begin to shape future teachers.
                Therefore, this article seeks to present several compelling reasons for why DH
                methods belong in the classroom and then collate a variety of accessible ways to
                incorporate them.

            
                Why DH methods belong in the classroom

                6
DH methods belong in the classroom because they offer a fruitful means of
                    developing the digital literacy skills that students need to prepare them for
                    their personal and professional lives. Teachers should not leave them to
                    navigate the challenging ocean of digital technology and culture on their own.
                    Students themselves express a desire to learn more about and engage with
                    technology. EDUCAUSE’s study of 3,000 U.S. undergraduates indicates that
                    students frequently use applications in which their skill levels do not meet
                    their needs, especially in the areas of programming languages and e-portfolios
                    (see Figure 1) [Dahlstrom et al 2011].

                
                    
                    [image: ]

                Figure 1. 
Student use and skill level of software in ECAR
                            National Study of Undergraduate Students and Information Technology,
                            2011[Dahlstrom et al 2011](CC BY-NC-ND Eden Dahlstrom,
                        Tom de Boor, Peter Grunwald, and Martha Vockley, 2011)


                7
EDUCAUSE’s study of over 100,000 undergraduates across 14 countries finds that
                    about three out of four students agree that technology helps them achieve
                    academic outcomes and prepares them for the workplace [Dahlstrom, Walker, and Dziuban 2013]. The most popular combination of how to deliver
                    more technology training is through face-to-face instruction in traditionally
                    designed courses, which leads authors to conclude that “students aren’t really
                        interested in taking separate ‘digital literacy’ courses
                        or even using on-demand web or help desk resources,” preferring to follow
                    their teachers’ guidance regarding technology [Dahlstrom, Walker, and Dziuban 2013, 11]. It makes sense, then, for humanities teachers to be the ones to
                    facilitate students’ engagement with technology within the context of their
                    courses. As Cunningham et al. argue, “Information literacy and a sophisticated level of
                            computer literacy can no longer be considered appendages to an Arts
                            degree. They must be incorporated into the course work for the degree
                            itself”
                         [Cunningham et al. 2008]. Neglecting to teach digital literacy in humanities courses prevents
                    students from gaining the technological skills that they hope for or expect from
                    their undergraduate education. 

                8
Certainly the humanities have always provided education for an environment,
                    rather than focus on specific vocational training, but there is a risk of
                    underpreparing students if teachers assume that they inherently know how to
                    transfer the oft-repeated skills of critical thinking and writing to the digital
                    realm. Students are not “digital natives” just by virtue of
                    living and breathing apps and social media in a world of data. Many lack basic
                    digital literacy skills, from understanding the logic of code and tagging behind
                    webpages [Ficke 2014, 207] to knowing about file naming
                    conventions and advanced web searches [Mostern and Gainor 2013]. Critical
                    evaluation of sources becomes increasingly complex online, where websites blend
                    human- and bot-created content, sponsored listings, and nonlinear text and
                    hyperlinks without traditional marks of credibility or authority [McVerry 2013, 13]. Students must be able to decipher the
                    perspectives and motives of a webpage’s authors in order to judge its usefulness
                    and truthfulness [McVerry 2013, 91, 95]. They need guidance
                    to transfer the skills developed through the close reading of a poem or
                    manuscript to an analysis of a modern multimedia website. In a time of
                    significant social, political, and ecological challenges, humanities teachers
                    with “intimate and largely unsupervised access to developing minds” have a
                    tremendous opportunity to positively influence the next generation [Menand 2010, 129]. The definitions of critical thinking and
                    writing are flexible enough to address the need for critical digital literacy,
                    which will allow students to transfer traditional skills to the changing digital
                    world.

                9
Indeed, students rely on transferable skills like critical thinking developed in
                    humanities degrees for their future success, be that in the workplace, graduate
                    school, or elsewhere. They therefore need not only critical thinking and writing
                    skills for print-based and digital environments, but also competence with
                    digital technology. As the Learning Literacies for the Digital Age (LLiDA)
                    project found, the “nature of work is changing, not just for the growing
                        numbers of graduates directly employed in the ‘digital’
                        industries”, with over three-quarters of jobs in the UK, for example,
                    needing information technology competence and a continual updating of skills
                        [Beetham, McGill, and Littlejohn 2009, 16]. One of the employment fields closely
                    connected to the humanities is the GLAM (Galleries, Libraries, Archives, and
                    Museums) sector, which needs staff to be digitally literate to properly digitize
                    content, manage databases, and deliver technology-based educational programs.
                    But historically, humanities teachers have been resistant to the notion of
                    practicality in their courses; they espouse learning for learning’s sake and
                    assign essays that seem to be training more researchers like themselves rather
                    than enabling students to have an impact on their world.[6] Yet the reality is that most undergraduate students will not
                    go into academia; indeed, there are not enough jobs for those who have trained
                    for them [Menand 2010]. Humanities students may not have chosen a
                    vocational path, but many still view an undergraduate degree as a means of
                    obtaining a good job to support themselves. They want “education with labour market value that provides them
                            with skills relevant for today and tomorrow”
                         [Hoidn and Kärkkäinen 2014, 13]. Teachers who extend the learning experience to include digital literacy
                    prepare students with an expanded set of skills for whichever path they choose
                    to pursue.

                10
Furthermore, fostering digital literacy can be seen as having positive feminist
                    implications by empowering women to engage and experiment with digital
                    technology, for when we imagine the humanities undergraduate, the likelihood is
                    that the person will be a woman. In much of the world, women are pursuing higher
                    education in increasing numbers and now outnumber men. According to the UNESCO
                    Institute for Statistics’ Global Education Digest
                        2010 with a special focus on gender, women are enrolling in and
                    graduating from tertiary institutions at higher rates than men in most countries
                    (see Figure 2) [UNESCO 2010]. UNESCO’s report also shows that
                    overall, women comprise a majority of graduates in the humanities and arts (see
                    Figure 3). Therefore, ensuring that these classes promote digital literacy
                    skills will benefit a higher percentage of women than men.

                
                    
                    [image: ]

                Figure 2. 
Female graduates as a percentage of total graduates from tertiary
                        education


                
                    
                    [image: ]

                Figure 3. 
Humanities and arts graduates as a percentage of total graduates from
                        tertiary education


                11
Improving digital literacy among women in particular is important because of the
                    research showing they are already at a disadvantage when it comes to technology.
                    Researchers have found “a strong overlap between attitudes of computing culture
                            and those of masculine culture” including themes of “aggression,
                            hierarchy, and dominance”
                         [Cohoon and Aspray 2006, 145]. Male traits are linked with competence in computing, and it is assumed
                    that females are disinterested or “naturally” afraid of
                    tinkering with computers [Burke 2007, 7]
                    [Varma 2007, 361]. These kinds of gender stereotypes help
                    contribute to women’s lower self-confidence than men in relation to computing
                    and may cause them to reject it as unappealing [Cohoon and Aspray 2006, 165]
                    [Margolis and Fisher 2002]. Even with efforts to address the
                    underrepresentation of women and other minority groups in science, technology,
                    engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, progress has been slow [Bystydzienski and Bird 2006]. Cultural stereotypes labelling STEM fields as
                    masculine and more human-centered fields such as the arts as feminine still
                    exert a strong influence on individuals’ choices of degree programs [Charles and Bradley 2006]. Given that a majority of humanities majors are
                    women and this trend is likely to continue, it is essential that students have
                    the opportunity to gain digital literacy skills and build their confidence with
                    technology within the humanities classroom.

                12
Sitting at the intersection of digital technology and the humanities, Digital
                    Humanities offers the opportunity to engage female students with technology in
                    the degree programs that they already choose and enjoy. Women may be more likely
                    to become interested in and gain confidence with technology if it is taken out
                    of a male-dominated context and put in their literature, history, philosophy,
                    and other humanities courses. Humanities teachers are in a unique position to
                    link technology and computing to culture and emphasize the social relevance
                    factor that women prioritize [American Association of University Women 2015]
                    [Margolis and Fisher 2002].[7] The humanities already have an
                    abundance of rich narratives–the allure of DH to the female undergraduate may be
                    related to its ability to connect something technical and digital (like entering
                    information into a database or creating a website) with the human element
                    (curating thousands of images and material related to the Canterbury Earthquakes
                    in New Zealand online for a community of people in recovery).[8] When introduced
                    gradually into the classroom, DH can offer a more palatable, less intimidating
                    experience with technology for women; ultimately, it may surprise those who
                    would never have thought themselves capable of tinkering with technology but who
                    appreciate that DH encourages experimentation and a self-taught ethos while
                    keeping the human at the center, rather than the tech. Thus, if teachers place
                    DH methods into their courses, they offer women in those courses the chance to
                    experiment with technology as a different way of studying the subject. They also
                    promote digital literacy skills in a particular humanities context, which can
                    have a positive impact on women’s confidence with technology and future
                    success.

                13
Incorporating DH methods into non-DH classrooms may also help address the lack of
                    diversity that has been raised as an issue within the field of DH itself.
                    Concerns continue to be raised by DH scholars, including Tara McPherson with
                        “Why are the Digital Humanities So White?”
                    [McPherson 2012]; Adeline Koh and Roopika Risam with their
                    Postcolonial Digital Humanities website [Koh and Risam]; and initiators
                    of the #transformDH movement. Brett D. Hirsch’s introduction to Digital Humanities Pedagogy acknowledges that DH
                    pedagogy could be discussing issues of “class, disability, ethnicity, gender,
                        race, and sexuality” and limited diversity in the DH community but falls
                    short of this potential [Hirsch 2012, 27]. Though the number
                    of DH centers and degree programs is increasing, they are still housed in a
                    minority of institutions which tend to be located in North America or Europe.
                    Many students will not have the option of choosing a DH minor, major, or
                    certificate or going to the University of Victoria’s popular Digital Humanities
                    Summer Institute, though they may be able to attend a local
                        THATCamp.[9] Obstacles like funding,
                    institution size, infrastructure, language barriers, and geographical proximity
                    limit what institutions can offer in support of DH projects and travel to DH
                    events. Faculty already marginalized because of their contingent status
                    (discussed below) may be especially hesitant about DH-driven learning
                    experiences in the classroom, just as students already burdened by debt and
                    anxious about the job market may be hesitant about deviations from their
                    expectations. But if teachers include DH as a regular component of their
                    courses, this may serve to increase the diversity of the incoming generation of
                    DH scholars and drive change toward making DH more accessible and expected. Once
                    exposed to DH, some students will inevitably want to take the next step by
                    creating or joining a DH project, or pressuring their institution to begin
                    offering DH programs. Those students who eventually become teachers themselves
                    will also be used to the combination of traditional and DH teaching techniques
                    in their classroom, thus continuing to shape DH pedagogy. Certainly teaching
                    inflected with DH is not a panacea for all the world’s ills. But expanding the
                    pool of undergraduates familiar with DH represents one way to bring a more
                    diverse set of perspectives and bodies to the field.

            

            
                How to incorporate DH into the classroom

                14
Ways of incorporating DH methods into the classroom need to be accessible,
                    meaning small-scale and not resource-intensive, in light of the ongoing issue of
                    part-time, untenured, and unstable labor in academia.[10] Around
                    three-quarters of higher education faculty in the U.S. are contingent, or
                    non-tenure track, and over half of those are part-time instructors or graduate
                    teaching assistants [Barnshaw and Dunietz 2015, 13]. This trend is being
                    replicated around the world [Teeuwen 2007], with the result being
                    that “the overwhelming majority of our academic colleagues
                            struggle to provide excellent instruction while mired in precarious
                            contingent appointments”
                         [American Association of University Professors 2014]. The tenuous nature of this employment may then affect teachers’ ability
                    or perceived ability to experiment with DH. Indeed, in one survey of part-time
                    faculty members, respondents “paint a dismal picture” regarding
                    institutional support for resources needed to maintain and improve teaching
                    quality [Coalition on the Academic Workforce 2012, 14]. Adjuncts may not even have an office
                    space, let alone access to servers and labs or an effectual relationship with IT
                    staff. Kenneth T. Ryesky lists nine barriers to adjunct faculty obtaining full
                    access to IT resources and support, ranging from compatibility issues between
                    campus technology and a teacher’s personal technology to the specialized
                    technology needs of some courses [Ryesky 2007]. Another obstacle
                    is that the structures of hiring and promotion often do not reward risk-taking
                        [Rogers 2015]. Therefore, starting small with DH pedagogy, as
                    Ryan Cordell recommends [Cordell 2015], may be the only way in the
                    foreseeable future of incorporating DH into undergraduate humanities classrooms.
                    This perspective follows the approach that Adeline Koh takes in “Introducing Digital Humanities Work to Undergraduates,”
                    where she offers easy ways for newcomers to implement DH projects in the
                    curriculum [Koh 2014]. 

                15
If DH methods are to be the means by which humanities undergraduates gain digital
                    literacy skills as well as exposure to the field, teachers need to focus on
                    which aspects of technology they want to focus on in their course–overwhelming
                    students with too much technological interaction can be detrimental to their
                    confidence and future success. For those who lack access or experience with
                    computers due to various barriers, appropriate scaffolding is important to make
                    DH accessible in terms of both resources and level of difficulty. Erika E.
                    Smith’s review of the “digital native” debate finds several
                    studies that show the importance of socioeconomic status, including race and
                    gender, in affecting a student’s technology skills and abilities [Smith 2012]. By being aware of differing levels of technological
                    understanding, humanities teachers can avoid leaving inexperienced students
                    behind, as has happened in computer science when instructors incorrectly assume
                    a certain level of prior computing knowledge [Cohoon and Aspray 2006]. Using
                    John Biggs and Catherine Tang’s process of constructive alignment in teaching
                    design [Biggs and Tang 2007], teachers can include a particular aspect of
                    digital literacy as one of the desired learning outcomes in a course and
                    gradually adapt the learning environment and assessments to be conducive to
                    students gaining new skills and comfort with technology in the context of the
                    humanities. In this way, teachers can “reverse engineer individual course
                        outcomes from what [they] want the successful graduating students to be able
                        to do” so that teaching becomes “the creating of a context for student
                            achievement”
                         [Rockwell and Sinclair 2012, 188]. 

            

            
                Digital Humanities Methods

                16
This article continues along the trajectory of Jon Saklofske, Estelle Clements,
                    and Richard Cunningham’s chapter “They Have Come, Why Won’t
                        We Build It? On the Digital Future of the Humanities” in Digital Humanities Pedagogy
                    [Saklofske, Clements, and Cunningham                     2012]. The authors see undergraduate programs as
                        “ripe for the introduction and integration of digital humanities ideas and
                        practices” and also believe in starting small [Saklofske, Clements, and Cunningham                     2012, 323–4]. In an attempt to consider the variety
                    of ways DH might be incorporated into an undergraduate classroom in a broad
                    fashion, I have used a selection of the methods from Digital_Humanities by Anne Burdick, Johanna Drucker, Peter
                    Lunenfeld, Todd Presner, and Jeffrey Schnapp [Burdick et al. 2012] and
                        “A Guide to Digital Humanities” by Northwestern
                    University librarian Josh Honn [Honn 2014] as an overarching
                    framework, because these resources provide clear overviews of each method and an
                    orientation to the ideas underpinning the field. Although these methods have
                    often been seen as guiding principles for research, this is an imagining of how
                    they might be used to influence pedagogy, especially in my own field of English
                    Literature, with examples included from relevant case studies. These methods
                    capture the spirit of DH with the hope that current and soon-to-be teachers will
                    choose ones that interest them, read the respective secondary literature, and
                    gradually integrate DH into their courses. 

            

            
                Enhanced Critical Curation

                17
With ever-increasing amounts of data, one of the pedagogical challenges for
                    teachers is to avoid presenting students with pre-digested information and
                    instead help them learn how to critically sift through the data to find what is
                    meaningful and valuable. This includes the ability to judge the relationship
                    between originals and copies and the authority and meaning behind digital
                    objects [Burdick et al. 2012, 33]. It also means encouraging
                    students to roam responsibly outside of the gated world of the library, whose
                    catalogue has already been carefully curated for them. In fact, in a
                    multi-country survey[11] to discover college
                    students’ information-seeking behaviors, 89% indicated that they typically begin
                    their information search with a search engine, and more than half believed
                    information from search engines was as trustworthy as a library information
                    source [Online Computer Library Center 2006, 1–7, 3–4]. In a more recent study in the
                    US as part of Project Information Literacy, 92% of students used search engines
                    and 73% used Wikipedia for course-related research, demonstrating the continued
                    dominance of these sources [Head and Eisenberg 2010, 7]. In addition, 61%
                    of students reported that they encountered difficulties with filtering
                    irrelevant results and 41% struggled with determining credibility, tasks that
                    are pertinent to students’ need to cope with the expansion of information
                    sources online [Head and Eisenberg 2010, 25].

                18
Toward the goal of developing students’ capacity to judge online content and its
                    usefulness to their scholarship, teachers can enlist the assistance of
                    librarians. Juliette Levy’s Digital Zombies project for a history course
                    combines physical and digital library research skills with a fun popular culture
                    interface (including taking a selfie photo with a staff librarian). Students
                    assess the validity of Wikipedia and edit underdeveloped articles to avoid
                    becoming a digital zombie, or a student who will “use digital sources indiscriminately, without concern
                            for their reliability or origin”
                         [Levy]. Under the premise that during a zombie apocalypse students will need to
                    know where to find information on- and off-line to become specialists in a
                    certain area, the assignment helps them become more critical researchers with
                    minimal restrictions and guidance. In their 18th-century poetry course, Bill
                    Hutchings and Karen O’Rourke experimented with discontinuing the usual list of
                    neatly packaged essay questions and secondary sources–offered with the best of
                    intentions–because it was limiting students’ capacity for judging materials on
                    their own [Hutchings and O'Rourke 2002]. Their new problem-based assignment
                    required students to search for and assemble materials for an 18th-century
                    travel brochure designed to attract modern-day tourists to the countryside,
                    which meant students needed to make and critically assess their own reading
                    list. This kind of project could easily be modified to explicitly include
                    digital literacy skills around sifting through and choosing appropriate online
                    resources.

                19
Easy, fast access to an unprecedented volume of multimodal information via search
                    engines is changing how students acquire knowledge and determine its value.
                    Teachers should therefore foster self-reliance and students’ “ability to seek,
                        access, and assess quality information” anywhere they go [Giglio and Venecek 2009]. The dominance of the internet and sites like
                    Wikipedia means that teachers need to promote critical digital literacy skills
                    around evaluation and analysis of digital resources that will serve humanities
                    students long after they lose access to the library’s curated content. 

            

            
                Augmented Editions and Fluid Textuality

                20
Though critical editions of texts have a long history in the humanities, the
                    digital environment now offers more layers and spaces for interpretation, and
                    potentially more pedagogical avenues of exploration than the static print book.
                    So-called augmented editions can contain extra material “under the
                        hood”–such as tags that identify people, places, and themes–as
                    well as links to other digital material like audio, video, and images that can
                    help students relate the text to its historical and cultural context [Burdick et al. 2012, 35–36]. The increasing fluidity of texts, or
                    the ease with which digitized texts can be edited and changed, has helped enable
                    the shift toward more multifaceted texts and relational forms of analysis, which
                    students can engage with in order to hone their argumentation skills in the
                    digital space.

                21
In Katherine D. Harris’ Romantic literature course, students created their own
                    digital edition of Frankenstein with Romantic-era
                    and modern-day materials [Harris 2011]. As they added to their
                    annotated chapters in Google Sites with essays and linked images and resources,
                    they also reviewed and linked to each other’s work, ultimately breaking down
                    their notion of the lone Romantic author and giving them a greater understanding
                    of literary production in the 1800s as collaborative. Constructing a critical
                    edition of the novel in the digital environment enabled students to situate it
                    in terms of its own time period as well as theirs and make those connections
                    explicit through literal links to other digital content. Teachers can thus take
                    advantage of open-access digital editions of texts by not only using them in the
                    classroom, but guiding students through the creation of their own digital
                    editions, which develops skills in synthesizing digital resources and
                    communicating in a collaborative digital environment. 

                22
Teachers can also encourage this type of multimodal research and writing in a
                    perhaps less intensive step away from the traditional research paper: the
                    multimedia essay. The multimedia essay frees students from the shackles of the
                    traditional thesis-support structure while still challenging them to appeal to
                    several senses of their audience in order to make their point [Ellis 2013, 43–44]. They must still present a coherent
                    argument, but they gain experience navigating the internet with a specific
                    academic purpose and using new media like photos, clipart, videos, and sounds in
                    a relational way to connect and support their main points. This expansion of
                        “what counts as academic knowledge” also serves to question traditional
                    conventions, like the privileging of black text on white paper over other forms
                    of knowledge like oral histories or artistic works [Bowen and Whithaus 2013, 4–8]. The creation of multimodal editions and arguments may, then, be
                    a more inclusive way of helping students craft a persuasive argument that works
                    with the shift toward a multimedia world rather than against it. Teachers should
                    take advantage of these kinds of assignments as a way of promoting digital
                    literacy, encouraging students to evaluate, analyze, and use a variety of
                    digital resources as a means of effective and persuasive communication. 

            

            
                Distant/Close, Macro/Micro, Surface/Depth

                23
Close reading is a skill often practiced by undergraduate humanities students,
                    and their essays are supposed to reflect their ability to analyze a text at this
                    micro level. But the vast data being produced in today’s world means “it has become impossible to read, comprehend, and
                            analyze the digital cultural record without the assistance of digital
                            tools and methods”
                         [Burdick et al. 2012, 38]. There are new ways of creating meaning through the analysis of patterns
                    and relationships in larger bodies of texts, known as distant reading, and
                    students who gain some exposure to it will be able to use digital methods to
                    study the humanities in a new way that complements close reading.

                24
To compare trends in particular periods of history and literature, students can
                    use tools like Bookworm or Google Ngram, which graphs keyword frequency in the
                    millions of books Google has scanned. Although results must be viewed with
                    caution due to biases and errors in the corpus,[12] teachers can initiate discussion and critique of the
                    technology and remind students that the graphs are not necessarily proving
                    anything. Rather, a graph like that of the word “peace”
                    overtaking “war” in 1743 is actually “a doorway that leads to a room filled with questions,
                            each of which must be answered by the historian before he or she knows
                            something worth knowing”
                         [Kelly 2012]. The digital tool is just the beginning of more research and analysis to
                    make sense of the data and support a persuasive argument. By helping students
                    critically engage in distant reading, teachers foster the aspect of digital
                    literacy that involves questioning and challenging technology rather than
                    passively accepting it.

                25
Technology can assist with new ways of close reading as well. Although TEI (Text
                    Encoding Initiative)[13]
                    “is often considered a hobgoblin term, which represents all that is
                        computer science and all that is not literary,”
                    guiding students through marking up a text with TEI actually facilitates the
                    close reading of a text [Iantorno 2014, 143]. It develops
                    technical skills in addition to raising awareness of the “critical labor that digital resources seem to
                            dissolve”
                         [Fyfe 2011]. As an alternative to writing an essay, TEI demands “extended,
                        thoughtful engagement with the text” because students must pore over each
                    word, determine which features are of interest, and then tag them accordingly
                        [Gailey 2014, 194]. Furthermore, the exercise shows
                    students that building a digital product or tool is an act of interpretation
                    with the potential for human or software error [Ficke 2014, 201, 204] but also creative expression [Singer 2013].
                    When students examine texts from technology-enabled viewpoints, they learn to
                    complement traditional analytical skills with new ways of reading and oscillate
                    between discovery of large patterns and close analysis of them [Burdick et al. 2012, 39]. Teachers should provide these
                    opportunities not only because they enhance the study of the humanities, but
                    because they prompt critical reflection on the technology and data being relied
                    upon, which is transferable to other contexts.

            

            
                Data Visualization and Design

                26
Data visualization offers a way of modeling knowledge and relationships that goes
                    beyond the borders of the text and adds to an increasingly visual-rich
                    environment, where knowing “how to read and visualize forms is at the basis of
                            digital literacy and the assessment of meaning”
                         [Burdick et al. 2012, 45]. Teachers can use the variety of data visualization tools and projects
                    now available to prompt questions and research on a chosen topic and teach
                    students how to analyze visualizations as subjective rather than objective
                    representations.

                27
Introducing students to data visualization by having them create their own images
                    gives them the opportunity to tinker with various ways of representing data
                    before analyzing their results. Word cloud generators like Wordle allow students
                    to see the most frequent words in a text, such as their own writing or a
                    digitized novel or play, with the ability to customize and save images and
                    consider what is gained or lost in the transformation. Voyant Tools includes a
                    suite of powerful textual analysis tools that generate graphs and other
                    visualizations. Such web-based tools are “both intuitive enough for lower-level undergraduates to
                            learn without much coaching and powerful enough to show how computers
                            have expanded the ways we can interact with texts and analyze their
                            content”
                         [Ficke 2014, 205]. 

                28
There are dozens of map and timeline visualization tools online, as well as DH
                    projects for particular time periods that teachers can incorporate into their
                    classrooms. For example, the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database is a project
                    that contains information on almost 36,000 slaving voyages and includes
                    customizable map and timeline visualization tools, as well as a lesson designed
                    specifically for undergraduates. Teachers who want to encourage their students
                    to learn how to make their own timelines can point them to Timeline JS, which is
                    an open-source tool that would only require students to input information like
                    dates, image links, and event descriptions into a Google spreadsheet in order to
                    create an interactive timeline. Teachers should encourage students to harness
                    the capabilities of data visualization tools within the context of the
                    humanities so as to broaden their learning experience with new media and digital
                    tools and extend their print-based analytical skills into the digital space.

            

            
                The Animated Archive

                29
With an increasing amount of content digitized and curated by cultural heritage
                    and scholarly institutions and available online for a global audience, teachers
                    have the opportunity to introduce students to the affordances of collections and
                    archives no longer bound to the physical object. There is an increasing number
                    of subscription-based and open-access projects that include not only
                    digitizations of texts, but images and additional contextual material that
                    teachers can use in their pedagogy.[14]
                

                30
Caley Ehnes had students consult British Periodicals I &
                        II and Nineteenth-Century British Periodicals I
                        & II to help them contextualize Victorian poems that originally
                    appeared in periodicals, achieving the goal of making poetry “more than an impenetrable series of lines in a
                            scholarly anthology”
                         [Ehnes and Hingston 2015, 199]. Upon reflection, Ehnes saw potential to make discussions about the
                    archive itself part of the curriculum, such as asking students to critically
                    consider how the structure of the database necessarily shapes the information
                    they can retrieve—just as the periodical press had influenced aspects of
                    Victorian poetry. Using the Emily Dickinson
                    Archive, Wesley Raabe switched from discussing Dickinson’s poetry in the
                    traditional classroom format to having students read aloud manuscript facsimiles
                    and investigate poetic vocabulary in the digital lexicon, which is based on
                    definitions of words in the Webster’s 1844 dictionary that Dickinson owned [Raabe 2014]. Reading aloud from the online manuscripts drew
                    attention to possible variants of the same poem, while discovering the
                    figurative meanings of words like “burglar” and
                        “velvet” meant that “students felt empowered to attempt
                        much more ambitious readings of the poems” both in class and in final
                    essays [Raabe 2014, 180]. The archive brought the poems to
                    life in a way that the standard literature anthology did not. 

                31
Such digital archives also afford teachers the opportunity to counteract
                    students’ typical view of a text “as stable and its material and editorial history as
                            irrelevant”
                         [Gailey 2014, 196]. Students who examine a text in its original manuscript form start
                    becoming aware of the decisions made in the process of transferring that
                    manuscript to the tidy text in their book. The archive enabled Raabe to draw
                    undergraduate students’ attention to the choices made by scholars in
                    transcribing Dickinson’s poems, including the removal of alternate words and
                    stray markings that may have altered meanings. Such teachable moments are made
                    easier in an age of digitization and quick access to scholarly archives;
                    however, teachers may also wish to prompt students to critically reflect on the
                    ease with which technology can obscure or delete prior versions of texts and
                    what implications this has for the future of digital materials. When online
                    collections and archives are available, teachers should use them to trigger new
                    kinds of thoughtful analysis and help students comfortably integrate digital
                    resources into their studies. 

            

            
                Humanitites Gaming

                32
Students have grown up immersed in digital games on phones, tablets, and
                    computers, and many place high value on “interactive programs that engage their attention while
                            at the same time deepening their understanding of meaningful subject
                            matter”
                         [Burdick et al. 2012, 52].

                33
Games engage with the power of the network and make players aware that important
                    knowledge is not isolated in one person, tool, or technology but rather in the
                    way all of these are interconnected, much like the real world in an information
                    society [Gee 2007, 197]. 

                34
Instead of resisting the rise of gaming culture, teachers can find ways of
                    redirecting students’ eagerness to engage with simulated environments into an
                    academic context. 

                35
Many teachers have used the free three-dimensional virtual world of Second Life
                    to stimulate students’ interest in and understanding of history and literature.
                    Some ask students to virtually reconstruct historical theatres like The
                        Globe[Burdick et al. 2012, 51]. Elizabeth Zold has used it to
                    connect her students more viscerally with 18th-century travelogue authors by
                    making them reflect on and write about their own experience of traveling to a
                    new environment [Zold 2014]. Students who had previously dismissed
                    travel literature as too biased realized how difficult it was to describe what
                    they saw and choose what to focus on in Second Life. They gained an appreciation
                    for the “complex process of negotiating details, accuracy, novelty, and
                        personal opinions” and began to “negotiate their expectations of how a text is
                            constructed”
                         [Zold 2014, 324, 239]. 

                36
Although cost and technological barriers may prevent students from being able to
                    use games in the classroom,[15] teachers can draw on students’ existing knowledge, as well
                    as screenshots or walkthrough guides, to set them up to develop a critical
                    perspective on how games are constructed. Students can examine which aspects of
                    culture a game includes and which it leaves out and why; in a history class,
                    this might mean assessing whether the so-called realistic and authentic worlds
                    in medieval games truly represent a diverse European populace [Young 2014]. Teachers can also teach game design as a form of
                    interpretative writing, where students transform elements of a narrative like
                    the postmodern The Crying of Lot 49 into a quest
                        [Howard 2007]. Rather than reproduce narrative events in a
                    linear way, students imagine and describe a game environment wherein players
                    could go on a journey and experience some of the themes from the novel in the
                    process. This kind of creative and analytical writing can reveal the
                    multiplicity of interpretations for any particular text and induce students to
                    role-play the characters in order to design an interesting game. There is great
                    potential for gaming to transform DH pedagogy, as [Burdick et al. 2012]
                    note. Teachers should consider how the conventions of games may be able to
                    supplement traditional forms of reading and analysis and expand students’
                    critical perspective to digital culture.

            

            
                Repurposable Content and Remix Culture

                37
Read-only culture is fading: the Web encourages a read/write/rewrite ethos [Burdick et al. 2012, 56]. Students want to take other people’s
                    content, remix and personalize it, then distribute it [Giglio and Venecek 2009]. However, they may find the inflexibility of humanities structures running
                    counter to their creativity, and thus miss an opportunity to learn how to remix
                    responsibly amidst issues of intellectual property, copyright, and
                        licensing.[16] Teachers can tap
                    into the remix urge by incorporating activities like multimedia projects, wiki
                    editing, meme creation, and social media exchanges, all of which blend writing
                    and research in new ways, encourage personalization over replication, and foster
                    digital literacy skills.

                38
The ubiquity of social media, especially, opens up a range of potential projects
                    for humanities students that can both deepen their engagement with course
                    content and improve their ability to integrate and synthesize digital resources
                    as they communicate via digital platforms. In essence, the humanities have
                    always involved a spirit of remixing, with stories, legends, and symbols being
                    shared in new iterations spanning the centuries. Perhaps the most iconic example
                    is Shakespeare, whose plays are now being remixed, repurposed, and distributed
                    across the Web, both inside and outside of the classroom. Alan Liu has
                    encouraged this mindset in his Literature+ course by having students use
                    LiveJournal and Facebook to create profile pages and interactions between
                    characters from Shakespeare and Chaucer, enabling innovative juxtapositions and
                    interpretations [Liu 2013]. Four young women from New Zealand
                    known as The Candle Wasters have mixed Shakespeare with YouTube, Facebook,
                    Twitter, Tumblr, and current events to create their hit literary web series,
                    self-described as fierce, funny, and feminist [The Candle Wasters 2015]. They have amassed thousands of
                    subscribers–94% female, 53% of which are aged 18 to 24 like the creators–who
                    tune in weekly to enjoy the continuing relevance and pleasures of the Bard’s
                    plays, demonstrating the popularity and impact of this kind of remixing, for
                    young women especially [The Candle Wasters 2015].[17] Having to imagine how characters would
                    construct their digital selves and then build those identities involves a
                    synthesis of the past and present in relation to both content (Early Modern to
                    Postmodern) and context (physical actors to digital profiles). 

                39
Teachers who nurture and engage with similar kinds of projects can embrace “the
                        pedagogical applications of Web 2.0 technology” and “create new contexts that emphasize flexibility in a way
                            that is relevant to the current culture of information”
                         [Giglio and Venecek 2009]. Teachers should ask students not to write but “to
                        weave–to build, to fabricate, to design” and engage “with seemingly incongruous materials [while] developing
                            a critical thinking practice about the process and the product”
                         [Sample 2012]. They should position the material of the humanities as adaptable to the
                    changing digital environment and encourage students to gain proficiency in
                    remixing and communicating in that space.

            

            
                Ubiquitous Scholarship

                40
The internet has already enabled people and communities outside of academia to
                    participate in the production and distribution of knowledge on a global scale,
                    so it makes sense for students to also contribute to the expansion of humanities
                    scholarship in the digital environment. In so doing, they have the opportunity
                    to develop digital literacy skills around constructing knowledge online,
                    communicating via digital platforms, and critiquing crowd-sourced information. 

                41
For teachers, this involves breaking the closed loop of “disposable assignments […] that add no value to the
                            world—after a student spends three hours creating it, a teacher spends
                            30 minutes grading it, and then the student throws it away”
                         [Wiley 2013]. Although teachers must exercise caution and address privacy issues, by
                    incorporating more public writing into their courses they impart a crucial
                    message to students that “what they think and what they say and what they
                        write matters” to their class as well as the world [Sample 2012]. The hypothetical public reader prompts students to “take ownership of their scholarship in a way rarely
                            engendered in the typical research essay, which customarily has an
                            audience of one”
                         [Ehnes and Hingston 2015, 206]. Another form of public scholarship might involve having students
                    contribute to a DH project like the Transcribe Bentham
                    project–to “help create for posterity a vast digital repository of
                        Bentham’s writings”–and then reflect on their contribution [Causer 2013]. By transcribing or translating parts of a manuscript
                    that students know will be available online, they can gain confidence in working
                    with technology for a specific humanities purpose and the satisfaction of moving
                    the field forward. 

                42
Rather than continuing academia’s longstanding condemnation of wiki sites,
                    teachers can encourage students who are privileged with access to educational
                    materials to make quality contributions. After all, the “encyclopedia is a
                        humanist reference genre” and millions rely on wiki sites for open-access
                    information [Kill 2012, 404]. A project which had students
                    contribute to a wiki on Shakespeare taught them valuable lessons about knowledge
                    gaps and “the plausibility of objectivity in interpreting
                            history”
                         [Giglio and Venecek 2009]. Teachers can include editing or creating articles on Wikipedia as an
                    assignment, with the Wikimedia Foundation providing educational resources like
                    sample syllabi [Wikimedia 2012]. Wikipedia editing affords
                    teachers the opportunity to discuss and help address the site’s issues with a
                    lack of diversity (especially regarding women and those outside of North America
                    and Europe) and uneven or biased coverage.[18] Not
                    only are students more likely to go back and revise this kind of work as opposed
                    to a traditional essay, they establish a critical perspective on online
                    crowd-sourced sites and are better prepared for future “crowd-sourced engagement with editing, proofreading,
                            translation, and critical assessment”
                         [Burdick et al. 2012, 51]. Teachers should encourage students to take advantage of public
                    scholarship opportunities and address the pressing need for students to
                    construct knowledge and communicate in digital contexts.

            

            
                Conclusion

                43
Ultimately, if the incorporation of DH tools and methods into humanities
                    classrooms helps teachers prepare students to be more critically informed and
                    engaged in the digital environment of the 21st-century information society, it
                    becomes the ethical choice. It also becomes a feminist imperative in light of
                    the increasing percentage of women in higher education and humanities programs
                    who would benefit from gaining more confidence with technology. The benefit of
                    DH is that allows teachers to promote digital literacy skills in a
                    humanities-specific context and take advantage of online tools and projects.
                    Because teachers new to DH may feel overwhelmed by the prospect of integrating
                    it into their classrooms–especially if they are contingent faculty or lack
                    access to DH centers and labs–this article presents methods from Digital_Humanities as an accessible starting point for
                    transforming pedagogy. Teachers can foster more digital literacy among
                    undergraduate students by having them:

                	Critically sift through digital information
	Go beyond textbooks and essays with digital editions and multimedia
                        assignments
	Use technology-enabled viewpoints of distant and close reading 
	Visualize and manipulate texts with textual analysis tools
	Explore digital collections and archives 
	Play, critique, and design digital games
	Responsibly remix and share humanities content online
	Contribute to public scholarship through blogs and DH projects.



                44
Humanities students benefit by being able to critically read, reflect, and write
                    in both traditional and digital environments, making them better prepared for
                    future success in whichever path they choose to take. With ideas largely
                    traveling digitally now, teachers should ensure that their pedagogy equips
                    students with the skills to navigate this brave new digital world.

            

            
                Acknowledgements

                45
I would like to express my thanks to J. Smithies, E. Brogt, F. Dalzell, D.
                    Dubien, C. Jones, J. Kristensen, LJ. Walsh, D. Whaley, F. Yapp, and the DHQ editors and reviewers for their feedback at
                    various stages of this article. I am especially grateful to J. Smithies for
                    first introducing me to Digital Humanities, which has fundamentally changed my
                    scholarship and worldview.

            

        
        
            
        
    

Notes
[1]  HASTAC (Humanities, Arts, Science, and Technology
                    Alliance and Collaboratory) offers free resources and hosts student groups for
                    courses whose teachers lack other institutional support. See [Davidson 2015].
[2]  The NMC Horizon Report:
                        2015 Higher Education Edition lists improving digital literacy as a
                    solvable challenge [Johnson et al. 2015].
[3]  For a history of Digital Humanities in relation to English
                    departments, see [Kirschenbaum 2012].
[4]  See
                    also [Harris 2013] for examples of how to incorporate digital
                    pedagogy into undergraduate humanities classrooms in non-research intensive
                    universities. 
[5]  See [Bloomsburg U. Undergraduate ‘Manifesto’ 2010] for a manifesto by undergraduate students on how
                    DH evaded them for so long but then became essential.
[6]  See [Sample 2012] for issues with assigning traditional
                        essays.
[7]  In attempts to improve gender balance, some
                        computer science and engineering programs have made stronger links to social
                        good and relevance (see [Cohoon and Aspray 2006] and [Busch-Vishniac and Jarosz 2007]).
[8]  See the
                        University of Canterbury’s CEISMIC
                            Canterbury Earthquake Digital Archive.
[9]  THATCamps (The Humanities And Technology Camp) are
                        unconferences, or participant-driven meetings, enabling people to generate
                        discussions about humanities and technology.
[10] 
                        Non-resource-intensive tools and programs include wikis, blogs,
                        user-friendly databases like Omeka, and
                        text analysis and concordance programs listed on TAPoR or Bamboo DiRT.
[11]  The survey included over 3,000 respondents from
                        Australia, Canada, India, Singapore, UK, and US.
[12]  See [Pechenick, Danforth, and Dodds 2015] for limitations of the Google Books
                        corpus.
[13]  See A very
                            gentle introduction to the TEI markup language. 
[14]  See NYU Libraries’ list
                        of open-access literature-related digital collections and DH projects.
                    
[15]  Students may be able to use older, less
                        expensive versions of games (such as Civilization IV) if they have
                        compatible computers or access to computer labs where the games could be
                        installed.
[16]  For example, teachers should make students aware of how to
                        use the free licenses provided by Creative Commons.
[17]  The Candle
                        Wasters’ first and second series have a total of over 20,000 subscribers and
                        2.7 million views on YouTube. 
[18]  For more information on issues
                        with editors, see [Wikimedia 2011], [Lam et al. 2011],
                            [Hill and Shaw 2013], and [Adams and Brückner 2015].

Works Cited
Adams and Brückner 2015 Adams, J., & Brückner,
                    H. (2015, July-December). “Wikipedia, Sociology, and the
                        Promise and Pitfalls of Big Data.”
                    Big Data & Society, 1-5.
American Association of University Professors 2014 American Association of University Professors (2014). Losing Focus: The Annual Report on the Economic Status of the Profession,
                        2013-14. Retrieved from http://www.aaup.org/reports-publications/2013-14salarysurvey
American Association of University Women 2015 American Association of University Women (2015). Executive
                        Summary: Solving the Equation: The Variables for Women’s Success in
                        Engineering and Computing. Retrieved from http://www.aauw.org/files/2015/04/Solving-the-Equation-executive-summary-nsa.pdf
Barnshaw and Dunietz 2015 Barnshaw, J., &
                    Dunietz, S. (2015). “Busting the Myths: The Annual Report on
                        the Economic Status of the Profession, 2014-15.”
                    Academe. American Association of University
                    Professors.
Beetham, McGill, and Littlejohn 2009 Beetham, H.,
                    McGill, L. and Littlejohn, A. (2009). “Thriving in the 21st
                        century: Learning Literacies for the Digital Age (LLiDA project).”
                    Glasgow Caledonian University.
Biggs and Tang 2007 Biggs, J., & Tang, C.
                    (2007). Teaching for Quality Learning at University: What
                        the Student Does. 3rd Edition. Buckingham: Open University
                    Press.
Bloomsburg U. Undergraduate ‘Manifesto’ 2010 “Bloomsburg U. Undergraduate ‘Manifesto’ on Digital
                        Humanities.” (2010). Retrieved from http://4humanities.org/bloomsburg-u-undergraduate-manifesto-on-digital-humanities/
Bowen and Whithaus 2013 Bowen, T., & Whithaus,
                    C. (2013). “‘What Else is Possible’: Multimodal Composing
                        and Genre in the Teaching of Writing.” In T. Bowen and C. Whithaus
                    (eds), Multimodal Literacies and Emerging Genres,
                    Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, pp. 1-12.
Burdick et al. 2012 Burdick, A., Drucker, J.,
                    Lunenfeld, P., Presner, T., & Schnapp, J. (2012). Digital_Humanities. London: The MIT Press.
Burke 2007 Burke, R. J. (2007). “Women and Minorities in STEM: A Primer.” In R. J. Burke
                    and M. C. Mattis (eds), Women and Minorities in Science,
                        Technology, Engineering and Mathematics, Cheltenham, UK: Edward
                    Elgar, pp. 3-27.
Busch-Vishniac and Jarosz 2007 Busch-Vishniac, I. J., & Jarosz, J. P. (2007). “Achieving Greater Diversity through Curricular Change.” In R. J.
                    Burke and M. C. Mattis (eds), Women and Minorities in
                        Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics, Cheltenham, UK:
                    Edward Elgar, pp. 245-275.
Bystydzienski and Bird 2006 Bystydzienski,
                    J. M., & Bird, S. R. (2006). “Introduction.” In
                    J. M. Bystydzienski and S. R. Bird (eds), Removing
                        Barriers: Women in Academic Science, Technology, Engineering, and
                        Mathematics, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, pp.
                    1-19.
Causer 2013 Causer, T. (2013). “Welcome to Transcribe Bentham.”” Retrieved from http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/
Charles and Bradley 2006 Charles, M., &
                    Bradley, K. (2006). “A Matter of Degrees: Female
                        Underrepresentation in Computer Science Programs Cross-Nationally.”
                    In J. M. Cohoon and W. Aspray (eds), Women and Information
                        Technology: Research on Underrepresentation, Cambridge, MA: MIT
                    Press, pp. 183-203.
Coalition on the Academic Workforce 2012 Coalition on
                    the Academic Workforce (2012). A Portrait of Part-Time
                        Faculty Members: A Summary of Findings on Part-Time Faculty Respondents to
                        the Coalition on the Academic Workforce Survey of Contingent Faculty Members
                        and Instructors. Retrieved from http://www.academicworkforce.org/CAW_portrait_2012.pdf
Cohoon and Aspray 2006 Cohoon, J. M., &
                    Aspray, W. (2006). “A Critical Review of the Research on
                        Women’s Participation in Postsecondary Computing Education.” In J. M.
                    Cohoon and W. Aspray (eds), Women and Information
                        Technology: Research on Underrepresentation, Cambridge, MA: MIT
                    Press, pp. 137-180.
Cordell 2015 Cordell, R. (2015). “How Not to Teach Digital Humanities.” Retrieved from
                        http://ryancordell.org/teaching/how-not-to-teach-digital-humanities/
Cunningham et al. 2008 Cunningham, R., Duke,
                    D., Eustace, J., Galway, A., & Patterson, E. (2008). “The Humanities HyperMedia Centre @ Acadia University: An Invitation to
                        Think About Higher Education.”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly 2 (1).
Dahlstrom et al 2011 Dahlstrom, E., De Boor,
                    T., Grunwald, P., & Vockley, M. (2011). The ECAR
                        National Study of Undergraduate Students and Information Technology,
                        2011. Boulder, CO: EDUCAUSE Center for Applied Research. 
Dahlstrom, Walker, and Dziuban 2013 Dahlstrom,
                    E., Walker, J. D., & Dziuban, C. (2013). ECAR Study of
                        Undergraduate Students and Information Technology, 2013. Louisville,
                    CO: EDUCAUSE Center for Analysis and Research. 
Davidson 2015 Davidson, C. (2015). “How Do I Get Started? A Step-by-Step Guide to Designing a
                        Student-Centered Classroom, Pt 1.” Retrieved from https://www.hastac.org/blogs/cathy-davidson/2015/08/04/how-do-i-get-started-step-step-guide-designing-student-centered
Digital Pedgagogy? 2013 
                    “Digital Pedagogy?” (2013). “A
                        Digital Pedagogy Unconference at #MLA13.” Retrieved from http://www.briancroxall.net/digitalpedagogy/what-is-digital-pedagogy/
Ehnes and Hingston 2015 Ehnes, C., & Hingston,
                    K. (2015). “Collaborative Knowledge and Merging Media:
                        Teaching Victorian Periodical Print Using Digital Tools.”
                    Victorian Periodicals Review 48 (2):
                    197-215.
Ellis 2013 Ellis, E. (2013). “Back to the Future? The Pedagogical Promise of the (Multimedia)
                        Essay.” In T. Bowen and C. Whithaus (eds), Multimodal Literacies and Emerging Genres, Pittsburgh, PA:
                    University of Pittsburgh Press, pp. 37-72. 
Ficke 2014 Ficke, S. H. (2014). “From Text to Tags: The Digital Humanities in an Introductory
                        Literature Course.”
                    The CEA Critic 76(2): 200-210.
Fyfe 2011 Fyfe, P. (2011). “Digital Pedagogy Unplugged.”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly 5 (3).
Gailey 2014 Gailey, A. (2014). “Teaching Attentive Reading and Motivated Writing through
                        Digital Editing.”
                    The CEA Critic 76 (2): 191-199.
Gee 2007 Gee, J. P. (2007). What
                        Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy. New York:
                    Palgrave Macmillan.
Giglio and Venecek 2009 Giglio, K., & Venecek,
                    J. (2009). “The Radical Historicity of Everything: Exploring
                        Shakespearean Identity with Web 2.0.”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly 3 (3).
Harris 2011 Harris, K. D. (2011).
                        TechnoRomanticism: Creating Digital Editions in an Undergraduate
                        Classroom.
                    Journal of Victorian Culture 16 (1): 89-94. 
Harris 2013 Harris, K. D. (2013). “Play, Collaborate, Break, Build, Share: ‘Screwing Around’ in
                        Digital Pedagogy, The Debate to Define Digital Humanities … Again.”
                    Polymath: An Interdisciplinary Arts and Sciences
                        Journal 3 (3): 1-26.
Head and Eisenberg 2010  Head, A. J., &
                    Eisenberg, M. B. (2010). “Truth Be Told: How College
                        Students Evaluate and Use Information in the Digital Age.”
                    Project Information Literacy Progress Report,
                    University of Washington. 
Hill and Shaw 2013  Hill, B. M., & Shaw, A.
                    (2013). “The Wikipedia Gender Gap Revisited: Characterizing
                        Survey Response Bias with Propensity Score Estimation.”
                    PLoS ONE 8 (6): e65782. 
Hirsch 2012 Hirsch, B. D. (2012). “</Parentheses>: Digital Humanities and the Place of
                        Pedagogy.” In B. D. Hirsch (ed), Digital
                        Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics, Cambridge,
                    UK: Open Book Publishers, pp. 3-30.
Hoidn and Kärkkäinen 2014 Hoidn, S., &
                    Kärkkäinen, K. (2014). “Promoting Skills for Innovation in
                        Higher Education: A Literature Review on the Effectiveness of Problem-based
                        Learning and of Teaching Behaviours.”
                    OECD Education Working Papers, No. 100. OECD
                    Publishing. 
Honn 2014  Honn, J. (2014). “A
                        Guide to Digital Humanities.” Northwestern University Library.
                    Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20150919224700/http:/sites.northwestern.edu/
guidetodh/values-methods/
Howard 2007 Howard, J. (2007). “Interpretative Quests in Theory and Pedagogy.”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly 1 (1).
Hutchings and O'Rourke 2002 Hutchings, B.,
                    & O’Rourke, K. (2002). “Problem-Based Learning in
                        Literary Studies.”
                    Arts & Humanities in Higher Education 1 (1):
                    73-83.
Iantorno 2014 Iantorno, L. A. (2014). “Introducing Digital Humanities Pedagogy.”
                    The CEA Critic 76 (2): 140-146. 
Johnson et al. 2015 Johnson, L., Adams Becker,
                    S., Estrada, V., and Freeman, A. (2015). NMC Horizon
                        Report: 2015 Higher Education Edition. Austin, Texas: The New Media
                    Consortium.
Kelly 2012 Kelly, M. (2012). “Visualizing Millions of Words.” In M. K. Gold (ed), Debates in the Digital Humanities, University of
                    Minnesota Press. Retrieved from http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/1
Kill 2012 Kill, M. (2012). “Wikipedia, Collaboration, and the Politics of Free Knowledge.” In B.
                    D. Hirsch (ed), Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices,
                        Principles and Politics, Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers, pp.
                    389-405.
Kirschenbaum 2012 Kirschenbaum, M. (2012).
                        “What is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in
                        English Departments?” In M. K. Gold (ed), Debates in the Digital Humanities, University of Minnesota Press.
                    Retrieved from http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/38
Koh 2014 Koh, A. (2014). “Introducing Digital Humanities Work to Undergraduates.”
                    Hybrid Pedagogy. Retrieved from http://www.hybridpedagogy.com/journal/introducing-digital-humanities-work-undergraduates-overview/
Koh and Risam Koh, A., & Risam, R. Postcolonial
                    Digital Humanities. Retrieved from http://dhpoco.org/
                
Lam et al. 2011 Lam, S. K., Uduwage, A., Dong, Z.,
                    Sen, S., Musicant, D. R., Terveen, L., & Riedl, J. (2011). “WP:Clubhouse? An Exploration of Wikipedia’s Gender
                        Imbalance.”” WikiSym’11 Mountain View,
                    California. 
Levy Levy, J. Digital
                        Zombies. Retrieved from http://zombies.digital/
Liu 2013 Liu, A. (2013). “From
                        Reading to Social Computing.” In K. M. Price and R. Siemens (eds),
                        Literary Studies in the Digital Age: An Evolving
                        Anthology. Retrieved from https://dlsanthology.mla.hcommons.org/from-reading-to-social-computing/
Margolis and Fisher 2002 Margolis, J., &
                    Fisher, A. (2002). Unlocking the Clubhouse: Women in
                        Computing. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Martin 2008 Martin, A. (2008). “Digital Literacy and the ‘Digital Society'.” In C.
                    Lankshear and M. Knobel (eds), Digital Literacies:
                        Concepts, Policies and Practices, New York: Peter Lang, pp.
                    151-176.
McPherson 2012 McPherson, T. (2012). “Why Are the Digital Humanities So White?” In Debates in the Digital Humanities, edited by Matthew
                    K. Gold. In M. K. Gold (ed), Debates in the Digital
                        Humanities, University of Minnesota Press. Retrieved from http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/29
McVerry 2013 McVerry, J. G. (2013). “TPACK and New Literacies of Online Reading Comprehension:
                        Preparing Today’s Teachers for Tomorrow’s Readers.” In C. A. Young
                    and S. Kajder (eds), Research on Technology in English
                        Education, Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing, pp.
                    87-104.
Menand 2010 Menand, L. (2010). The Marketplace of Ideas. New York: W. W. Norton &
                    Company.
Mostern and Gainor 2013 Mostern, R., &
                    Gainor, E. (2013). “Traveling the Silk Road on a Virtual
                        Globe: Pedagogy, Technology and Evaluation for Spatial History.”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly 7 (2).
Online Computer Library Center 2006  Online Computer
                    Library Center (2006). “College Students’ Perceptions of
                        Libraries and Information Resources.” Dublin, OH: Online Computer
                    Library Center.
Pangrazio 2016 Pangrazio, L. (2016). “Reconceptualising Critical Digital Literacy.”
                    Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of
                        Education 37 (2): 163-174. 
Pechenick, Danforth, and Dodds 2015  Pechenick,
                    E. A., Danforth, C. M., & Dodds, P. S. (2015). “Characterizing the Google Books Corpus: Strong Limits to Inferences of
                        Socio-Cultural and Linguistic Evolution.”
                    PLoS ONE 10(10): e0137041. 
Raabe 2014 Raabe, W. (2014). “Estranging Anthology Texts of American Literature: Digital Humanities
                        Resources for Harriet Beecher Stowe, Walt Whitman, and Emily
                        Dickinson.”
                    The CEA Critic 76 (2): 169-190.
Rockwell and Sinclair 2012 Rockwell, G., &
                    Sinclair, S. (2012). “Acculturation and the Digital
                        Humanities Community.” In B. D. Hirsch (ed), Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics,
                    Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers, pp. 177-211.
Rogers 2015 Rogers, K. (2015). “Humanities Unbound: Supporting Careers and Scholarship Beyond
                        the Tenure Track.”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly 9 (1).
Ryesky 2007 Ryesky, K. T. (2007). “Bringing Adjunct Faculty into the Fold of Information and
                        Instructional Technology.” In R. Teeuwen and S. Hantke (eds), Gypsy Scholars, Migrant Teachers and the Global Academic
                        Proletariat, Amsterdam, NL: Rodopi, pp. 97-124.
Saklofske, Clements, and Cunningham                     2012 Saklofske,
                    J., Clements, E., & Cunningham, R. (2012). “They Have
                        Come, Why Won’t We Build It? On the Digital Future of the
                        Humanities.” In B. D. Hirsch (ed), Digital
                        Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics, Cambridge,
                    UK: Open Book Publishers, pp. 311-330.
Sample 2012 Sample, M. L. 2012. “What’s Wrong with Writing Essays.” In M. K. Gold (ed),
                        Debates in the Digital Humanities, University
                    of Minnesota Press. Retrieved from http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/42
Singer 2013 Singer, K. (2013). “Digital Close Reading: TEI for Teaching Poetic
                        Vocabularies.”
                    The Journal of Interactive Technology &
                        Pedagogy. Issue 3. 
Smith 2012 Smith, E. E. (2012). “The Digital Native Debate in Higher Education: A Comparative
                        Analysis of Recent Literature.”
                    Canadian Journal of Learning & Technology 38
                    (3): 1-18.
Teeuwen 2007 Teeuwen, R. (2007). “Introduction: Disappointed Hope – Adjunct Teachers in the
                        Two-Tier Academic Labour Market.” In R. Teeuwen and S. Hantke (eds),
                        Gypsy Scholars, Migrant Teachers and the Global
                        Academic Proletariat, Amsterdam, NL: Rodopi, pp. 1-23. 
Terras 2011 Terras, M. (2011). “Quantifying Digital Humanities.” Retrieved from http://www.ucl.ac.uk/infostudies/melissa-terras/DigitalHumanitiesInfographic.pdf
The Candle Wasters 2015 The Candle
                    Wasters (2015). “How to Make a Literary Webseries.”
                    Wellington, New Zealand, National Digital Forum conference. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-KkiL8Er_98
UNESCO 2010 UNESCO Institute for Statistics
                    (2010). Global Education Digest 2010: Comparing Education
                        Statistics Across the World. Montreal, Quebec, Canada: UIS.
                    Retrieved from http://www.uis.unesco.org/Library/Documents/GED_2010_EN.pdf
Varma 2007 Varma 2007 Varma,
                    R. (2007). “Women in Computing: The Role of Geek
                        Culture.”
                    Science as Culture 16 (4): 359-376.
Wikimedia 2011 Wikimedia Foundation (2011).
                        Wikipedia Editors Study. Retrieved from https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Editor_Survey_Report_-_April_2011.pdf
Wikimedia 2012 Wikimedia (2012). Instructor basics: How to use Wikipedia as a teaching
                        tool. Retrieved from https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/92/Instructor_
Basics_How_to_Use_Wikipedia_as_a_Teaching_Tool.pdf
Wiley 2013 Wiley, D. (2013). “What is Open Pedagogy?” Retrieved from http://opencontent.org/blog/archives/2975
Young 2014 Young, H. (2014). “Re-making The Real Middle Ages.” Retrieved from http://www.inthemedievalmiddle.com/2014/08/re-making-real-middle-ages.html
Zold 2014 Zold, E. (2014). “Virtual Travel in Second Life: Understanding Eighteenth-Century Travelogues
                        through Experiential Learning.”
                    Pedagogy 14 (2): 225-250.

2017 11.3
             | 
            XML
            | 
            Print Article


Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

 
            URL: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000315/000315.html
Last updated:
            
 Comments: dhqinfo@digitalhumanities.org
 Published by:
            The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
Affiliated with: Literary and Linguistic Computing
 Copyright 2005 - 
[image: Creative Commons License]
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
        


