[image: DHQ Logo]
[image: Digital Humanities Quarterly Logo]

homesubmissionsabout dhqdhq peoplecontact
 




Current Issue
	2017: 11.3

Preview Issue
	2017: 11.4

Previous Issues
	2017: 11.2
	2017: 11.1
	2016: 10.4
	2016: 10.3
	2016: 10.2
	2016: 10.1
	2015: 9.4
	2015: 9.3
	2015: 9.2
	2015: 9.1
	2014: 8.4
	2014: 8.3
	2014: 8.2
	2014: 8.1
	2013: 7.3
	2013: 7.2
	2013: 7.1
	2012: 6.3
	2012: 6.2
	2012: 6.1
	2011: 5.3
	2011: 5.2
	2011: 5.1
	2010: 4.2
	2010: 4.1
	2009: 3.4
	2009: 3.3
	2009: 3.2
	2009: 3.1
	2008: 2.1
	2007: 1.2
	2007: 1.1

Indexes
	 Title
	 Author


[image: sidenavbarimg]ISSN 1938-4122

Announcements
	Call for Reviewers
	Call for Submissions


[image: button1-addthis.gif]

DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly
2017
Volume 11 Number 3
2017 11.3
                     | 
                    XML

| 
		   Discuss
			(
				Comments
			)
                



    
        
            
                
                Building a Student-Centered (Digital) Learning Community With
                    Undergraduates

                Danica Savonick <danicasavonick_at_gmail_dot_com>, The Graduate Center, CUNY

                Lisa Tagliaferri <ltagliaferri_at_gradcenter_dot_cuny_dot_edu>, The Graduate Center, CUNY

            
            

            
        
        
        
        
     


    
        
            Abstract

                
                This article argues that digital humanities projects can promote social change,
                    collaboration, equity, and creativity through a focus on pedagogy in the
                    undergraduate classroom. We analyze a pedagogical project that overtly set out
                    to challenge structures of power and privilege in the undergraduate classroom
                    through the use of an open-source online learning community. The Futures
                    Initiative Commons in a Box site was developed and modified by the university
                    faculty, graduate, and undergraduate students that make up the community of
                    users. This learning community invites undergraduate and graduate students to
                    become active knowledge-producers who contribute to their own teaching and
                    learning. As such, the site works to increase students’ agency and reconfigure
                    hierarchical relationships of power and knowledge.

            

            
        
        
            1
At its best, education catalyzes student agency, encourages critical, creative, and
                collaborative thinking, and promotes equity, even amidst conditions of widespread
                inequality and injustice. But how often are these values promoted, or even
                reflected, in our digital learning environments? As Miriam Posner argued in a recent
                keynote delivered at the Keystone Digital Humanities Conference, “For all of its vaunted innovation, the digital humanities
                        actually borrows a lot of its infrastructure, data models, and visual
                        rhetoric from other areas, and particularly from models developed for
                        business applications”
                     [Posner 2015]. In digital learning spaces, there is a similar problem: design often borrows
                from a traditional instructor–centered model of learning, with little room for
                collaboration among students, peer review, or opportunities for students to design
                aspects of their courses. In addition, as Audrey Watters recently argued, learning
                management systems collect massive amounts of student data that is not necessarily
                owned or protected by universities [Watters 2017]. While closed and
                proprietary educational technologies often maintain hierarchies between instructors
                and undergraduates and discourage creative student–driven learning, user–designed
                and student–centered digital tools can, in fact, redistribute power and contribute
                to the much larger project of social change. 

            2
In this essay, we examine how an open-access online learning space can work to
                enhance the egalitarian and participatory nature of an educational community. Based
                on our experiences creating a customized online network to advance the pedagogical
                goals of a course taught at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York
                (CUNY), “Mapping the Futures of Higher Education,” we
                will consider two questions: 1) What might a digital humanities project look like if
                you start with the educational needs and desires of diverse undergraduate students
                in a sprawling, vibrant public university system? 2) How can online community spaces
                enhance undergraduate digital humanities pedagogy? By exploring these questions, we
                hope to support others in bringing the insights of humanistic inquiry and critical
                pedagogy to bear on the production of digital learning spaces that maximize
                participation, equity, and collaboration within and beyond the undergraduate
                classroom.

            3
Selecting and developing a platform that would help both graduate and undergraduate
                students form a generative learning community was not only an educational technology
                project, but one that required the insights of humanistic knowledge and inquiry. It
                required thinking about power dynamics in the classroom and multiple ways of
                conceiving student-teacher relationships. For these insights, we turned to critical
                pedagogy, and the work of thinkers such as Paulo Freire, Jacques Rancière, and bell
                hooks [Freire 1970]
                [Rancière 1991]
                [hooks 2003]. Critical pedagogy challenges teachers and students to
                reconfigure hierarchies of power and knowledge in classrooms, institutions, and
                society. Thinking alongside Freire, who argues that liberatory pedagogy can only
                emerge by working “with, not for”
                     [Freire 1970, 48] those marginalized by the social order, we took a grassroots approach to
                knowledge production by developing this platform with ample input from the graduate
                student instructors and undergraduate students who were using it. Our work was also
                informed by Rancière’s emphasis on teaching students to learn from one another,
                rather than having to rely on an authority figure. Cognizant of ways that classrooms
                often reproduce power hierarchies, we sought to create an online community that
                would support learning through a more egalitarian, collaborative, creative,
                student–centered, and participatory experience. 

            4
While the online community we built can be understood as one possible answer to
                Posner’s call for critical interrogation and radical reimagination, our digital
                humanities praxis is also inspired by an earlier interlocutor, Audre Lorde, a poet,
                activist, and theorist who was also both a CUNY alumni and professor. In her essay,
                    “The Master’s Tools Will Never Dismantle the Master’s
                    House,” Lorde argues that feminists need a different relationship to
                difference: one that understands racial, sexual, and gender differences as sources
                of vital creativity, the kind of creativity necessary to imagine and bring about a
                more just and equitable world. In our efforts to build a user-friendly tool that
                would welcome and celebrate differences among undergraduate student users, we also
                used the insights of intersectionality, which, as Roopika Risam has recently argued,
                encourages digital humanities practitioners to “begin their work with an understanding of the
                        particularities necessary to design projects that account for influences of
                        difference on knowledge production”
                     [Risam 2015]. As such, we sought to build a learning community that would help draw out
                the wide range of experiences and knowledges that diverse undergraduate students
                bring to their classrooms. 

            5
With these considerations in mind, we embarked on our project to create an online
                environment that would unsettle academic structures of power and privilege, in part
                by treating differences — including differences in learning styles — as a valuable
                resource necessary for institutional and social change. We wanted not only to
                critique the structures of power reproduced through proprietary, hierarchical, and
                closed-access educational technologies, but to provide horizontal networked and open
                alternatives developed through structured collaboration between public university
                teachers and students. As we refined our online community, we sought to actualize
                these principles, remaining conscious of the ways in which one-size-fits-all
                assumptions about pedagogy, assignments, composition, and assessment have
                historically discouraged and excluded students who learn in distinct and creative
                ways [Davidson 2011]
                [Davidson 2017].

            
                “Mapping the Futures of Higher Education”

                6
“Mapping the Futures of Higher Education” was the
                    inaugural course of the Futures Initiative, a program established in 2014 by
                    Cathy N. Davidson at the Graduate Center, CUNY, in order to advance equity and
                    innovation in higher education. A federated university system that consists of
                    twenty–four colleges spanning the five boroughs of New York City, CUNY has
                    historically been a hotbed of progressive pedagogy, in part due to its diverse,
                    working–class student population.[1] The Free Academy (now CUNY’s City College) was initially
                    described as an educational “experiment” that would test “whether the children of the people, the children of the
                            whole people, can be educated, and whether an institution of the highest
                            grade can be successfully controlled by the popular will, not by the
                            privileged few”
                         [Our History]. Today, CUNY students come from 205 countries and speak more than 190
                    languages. Fifty–four percent are Pell grant recipients, 42% are
                    first–generation college students, 75% are students of color, and 39% have
                    household incomes of less than $20,000 [CUNY Office of Policy Research]. We mention
                    these statistics in order to highlight how the platform we adapted was designed
                    both to engage the school’s richly diverse undergraduate student population and
                    to take into account students’ financial situations and varied life
                    circumstances. 

                7
In spring 2015, Cathy N. Davidson and William P. Kelly co-taught a nontraditional
                    course entitled “Mapping the Futures of Higher
                        Education” at the Graduate Center. While a graduate seminar may seem
                    like an unlikely site from which to rethink undergraduate teaching in the
                    digital humanities, this radically interdisciplinary course focused explicitly
                    on the unique dual role of graduate students as formal learners and teachers: it
                    brought together graduate students who were teaching undergraduate classes with
                    the explicit aim of empowering their students by moving beyond academic models
                    of apprenticeship, expertise, and hierarchical authority — the same ideals that
                    have structured higher education since the mid-nineteenth century. The course
                    thematized the discrepancy between our current, standardized forms of education,
                    still shaped by the Taylorized Industrial Age (1865-1925), and the new modes of
                    distributed agency, knowledge production, and communication made possible by the
                    Internet. Graduate students and their undergraduates explored “new methods of peer learning and teaching,
                            interdisciplinary research collaborations, experiential learning, new
                            digital tools, and public (online) contributions to knowledge”
                         [Syllabus] that are critical for 21st-century knowledge-producers. 

                8
“Mapping” built a networked community that extended beyond the
                    13 graduate students enrolled in the course to the 365 undergraduates they were
                    teaching across ten of the CUNY campuses throughout the city, at schools like
                    Lehman College, Queens College, and Kingsborough Community College. While the
                    graduate student teachers came from many disciplines, and were teaching
                    undergraduate courses in topics ranging from chemistry to theater, all used
                    student-centered, peer-driven pedagogy to achieve successful student outcomes.
                    In addition, they all helped their undergraduate students increase their digital
                    literacies through their use of the networked Futures Initiative online
                    community site and guided them in experiments with digital knowledge production.
                    While not all of the undergraduate courses were taught in the humanities, the
                    graduate and undergraduate student instructors engaged in interdisciplinary
                    digital humanities praxis through their frequent interaction with the course
                    website, their final collaborative mapping projects, and their critical
                    reflections on the affordances of digital technology for scholarly inquiry and
                    the process of teaching and learning. 

                
                    
                    [image: ]

                Figure 1. 
Visualization of “Mapping the Futures of Higher
                            Education” by Kalle Westerling http://futures.gc.cuny.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/just-the-map.png


                9
In a moment of decreased educational funding, promoting education as a public
                    good has never been more urgent. As their final project for the course, the
                    graduate student instructors and their undergraduate students used the Futures
                    Initiative site as a space to collaborate on their contributions to the “CUNY
                    Maps of New York” project: a compendium of maps, films, visualizations,
                    websites, and timelines, all of which testify to the tremendous resources that
                    public education contributes to a city (futures.gc.cuny.edu/maps). While many digital humanities projects such as
                    Mapping the Republic of Letters, HyperCities, and Around DH in 80 Days revolve
                    around mapping, few showcase the creative, diverse, interdisciplinary work
                    produced by predominantly working-class undergraduate students —
                        “Futures Initiative Scholars” — from across two– and
                    four–year colleges. These multifaceted public maps illustrate what students
                    learned during their semester of intensely student–centered pedagogy,
                    demonstrating how undergraduate education is not something we invest in only for
                    individuals, but that radiates out to benefit larger publics. 

                
                    
                    [image: ]

                Figure 2. 
CUNY Maps of NYC: https://futuresinitiative.org/maps/


            

            
                The initial installation

                10
As Futures Initiative Research Fellows, we were charged with the task of adapting
                    and implementing a platform that would allow these undergraduate and graduate
                    students to find a supportive online community as they tried teaching and
                    learning methods such as student blogging, student-led class facilitation,
                    student-designed study guides and even quizzes, and final projects that were
                    both collaboratively created and publicly shared. Given that the traditional
                    pedagogies of higher education “have changed far more slowly than the modes of
                            inventive, collaborative, participatory learning offered by the Internet
                            and an array of contemporary technologies”
                         [Davidson and Goldberg 2010, 9], we designed the digital environment for this course to encourage these
                    engaged modes of learning. 

                11
In order to help both the graduate student instructors and the undergraduates in
                    their courses connect across geographic divides, we chose the Commons In A Box
                    (CBOX) platform — a free, open-source software project developed by a team led
                    by Matthew K. Gold and based at the Graduate Center, that provides users with
                    various ways to engage in online conversations, collaborate on projects, and
                    share content [Commons In A Box]. Since the Futures Initiative
                    advocates for greater equity and innovation at every level of the university, it
                    was important to have a website that was accessible, served to facilitate
                    learning and exploration, could be used by instructors across different
                    disciplines, and also connected community members. Using CBOX, with its
                    open-source and CUNY-based roots, was a logical choice for us, as it aligned
                    with our expectations and needs for a dynamic website structure. According to
                    the platform designers, “CBOX will be useful to any organization that is looking
                            for a shared space in which to build an engaged community of users and
                            developers”
                         [Commons In A Box]. CBOX utilizes both groups and sites as spaces for users to create
                    content and engage with each other. Groups have a user interface similar to
                    discussion forums, presenting an easy way to create conversations or for
                    instructors to ask questions of students. 

                
                    
                    [image: ]

                Figure 3. 
Private group forum for students in “Mapping the
                            Futures of Higher Education”
                    


                12
Networked sites can function as static course sites, course blogs with
                    student-authors, personal blogs, or personal sites. 

                
                    
                    [image: ]

                Figure 4. 
Public-facing blog for students in “Mapping the
                            Futures of Higher Education”” with links to student-designed
                        seminar sessions https://futuresinitiative.org/about-mapping-futures/


                13
For our customized version of the platform, we worked to create a site that
                    further considered accessibility with a safe and open feel while increasing the
                    likelihood of a user to explore content and connect to people through groups and
                    sites affiliated with the primary or parent site.

                14
Prior to the first meeting of “Mapping the Futures of Higher
                        Education,” Futures Initiative Deputy Director Katina Rogers and
                    Graduate Fellow Lisa Tagliaferri ensured that an initial iteration of our
                    CBOX-based site was up and running. At first, the site was set up as a hub site
                    affiliated with the graduate-level course taught by Davidson and Kelly, with the
                    understanding that the graduate student instructors would be creating connected
                    sites for their undergraduate-level courses. To that end, our initial version of
                    the site utilized a customized version of the CBOX Infinity Theme with a few
                    essential plugins such as iframe and document embedders to encourage the use of
                    multimedia. We have also included Leaflet’s Maps Marker Pro plugin since the
                    beginning of the course in order to supplement the mapping component of the
                    graduate course. 

            

            
                Balancing public pedagogy and supportive learning spaces

                15
Many of our decisions regarding our CBOX installation involved finding a balance
                    between the benefits of public-facing pedagogy and the need to create a
                    supportive learning environment in which students could experiment with new
                    ideas and take intellectual risks without the fear of public scrutiny. While
                    there are certainly benefits to having undergraduates write and learn in public,
                    doing so can make them susceptible to “trolls” — people
                    prowling the Internet looking to attack, rather than meaningfully engage with,
                    those whose viewpoints differ from their own (see, e.g. [Berg 2015]). Though we are committed to working transparently in public, we also respect
                    the privacy of the individuals participating in our program. Therefore, we have
                    given courses and groups the option to be private or partially-private on the
                    site, so that students and their instructors can decide how public they would
                    like their learning and teaching to be. Upon creating a site or group, users
                    determine the level of privacy, though they can later change permissions and
                    access levels through their administrative dashboard. To ensure a safe and
                    inclusive online area for users and courses, independent groups and individual
                    sites can be set by each networked site’s administrator — in this case, the
                    doctoral students teaching undergraduate courses — to be completely public, open
                    to the site’s network members but closed to the public, completely private, or
                    public with a locked area. This degree of user autonomy offers users a level of
                    freedom and authority to choose how best to generate and share their content and
                    to what audience(s). 

                16
These various levels of privacy allow courses to operate without the public
                    watching if users choose, or users can alternately run a very transparent course
                    so that other instructors can make use of resources and methods coming out of
                    student-centered learning practices. Of the sites on the Futures Initiative
                    network, about 40% are visible to the public to some degree, while 60% are
                    visible only to users affiliated with that specific site. Of the groups, 38% are
                    public, 50% are private, and 12% are hidden. As is evidenced by these numbers,
                    the level of privacy selected by users who administer sites and groups greatly
                    varies, with many choosing each option. The control afforded to users — in this
                    case both course instructors and undergraduate students — in determining the
                    degree of access that others have to their content therefore seems to be
                    valuable, as some prefer public spaces for convening while others opt for
                    privacy to conduct courses or write a personal blog outside of the general
                    public’s eye. This balance provides both a haven for discussions to take place
                    and a public platform to those who feel comfortable sharing their
                    classrooms.

                17
Collaborative and user-driven environments can create risks for users,
                    particularly in terms of privacy and data security. As privacy and Internet
                    ethics scholar Michael Zimmer notes, 
                        Web 2.0 also embodies a set of unintended consequences,
                            including increased flow of personal information across networks, the
                            diffusion of one’s identity across fractured spaces, the emergence of
                            powerful tools for peer surveillance, the exploitation of free labor for
                            commercial gain, and the fear of increased corporatization of online
                            social and collaborative spaces and outputs.
                         [Zimmer 2008]
                    

To counteract that risk, we advised graduate student instructors in best
                    practices for digital identity management and recommended that they do the same
                    with their students. For example, early in the semester, when creating a digital
                    map of their courses using “selfies,” graduate student
                    instructors encouraged undergraduate students to use representational, rather
                    than personally identifiable selfies (e.g. a book, a cat, an office chair) in
                    order to protect their privacy. In addition, we customized the signup and
                    profile creation process to ensure that users could determine how much of their
                    identity they wished to share with others. Especially in a moment of heightened
                    attention to students’ immigration statuses, and considering that students may
                    choose to use these online spaces to share personal stories and experiences,
                    these privacy precautions are particularly urgent.

                18
 The site sign-up process presented an opportunity for graduate student
                    instructors to talk with their undergraduate students about privacy and online
                    identity. Instructors, in conversation with their students, set up options for
                    signing up for an account using a pseudonym, the true identity of which would
                    only be known by the instructor and (optionally) the students in the class, in
                    order to protect students’ privacy. While new users are asked for a CUNY
                    affiliation, they do not have to reveal whether they are a student, instructor,
                    faculty member, or administrator. This exemplifies our commitment to a
                    non-hierarchical academic structure as a user cannot readily be identified by
                    others as to their status, employment, or level of education — unless they
                    decide to disclose this information in the “About you”
                    profile field. While not differentiating among types of users created a more
                    horizontal community structure, such a decision may merely conceal actual
                    differentials of power and privilege between students and instructors, a tension
                    we are working to address in future iterations. 

                19
All new users and their profiles are submitted for administrative approval by a
                    human to dissuade advertisers and ensure that spambots do not populate the site,
                    ensuring a protected and generative space. While this sign-up process has
                    prevented inappropriate comments, it also caused some users to sign up several
                    times as current web standards tend to grant automatic access to new users.
                    Having an exclusively human administrator may prove to be unsustainable as our
                    website grows with more connected graduate and undergraduate courses enrolling
                    throughout CUNY. To date, we have not required a CUNY-affiliated or .edu email
                    address, allowing each individual user to have greater agency in deciding how
                    they engage with the site and present their identity. 

                20
Allowing sites and groups to be public, or at least listed publicly, encouraged
                    users to interact across spaces within the Futures Initiative network. In “Open-Access Student-Centered Learning: The open web as a
                        collaborative space for higher education in public,” Lisa Tagliaferri
                    found via network analysis and visualization that users joined course sites and
                    user sites outside of those they were required to join for their coursework [Tagliaferri 2017]. This indicates that the CBOX platform of
                    networked sites presents itself as an open and dynamic structure, similar to a
                    sandbox game like Minecraft that is available for non-linear exploration.
                    Several recent studies have found that games like Minecraft have proven to be
                    effective tools for intrinsic self-motivated learning (see, e.g. [Short 2012]
                    [Bayliss 2012]
                    [Schifter and Cipollone 2013]
                    [Saito et al. 2014]
                    [Roscoe et al. 2014]). Tagliaferri’s analysis of our CBOX installation
                    suggests that digital learning environments encourage play and facilitate
                    multi-disciplinary learning. Our Futures Initiative CBOX installation may become
                    an environment in which we further explore how similar open world game
                    mechanics, including the utilization of badges for learning [Grant 2013], may offer alternate ways to achieve educational
                    outcomes. 

            

            
                Promoting student agency through an online community

                21
Student-centered learning and student leadership were clear focal points from the
                    outset of “Mapping the Futures of Higher Education.”
                    On the first day of the course, the instructors, Davidson and Kelly, left the
                    room, leaving behind a blank structured template for the semester’s syllabus,
                    plenty of markers, and 13 enthusiastic graduate students to determine the
                    trajectory of the course. The graduate students chose four pedagogical topics
                    that they believed were urgent to learn about:

                	student-centered pedagogy,
	alternative modes of assessment,
	undergraduate students’ life barriers and the ethics of teaching,
                        and
	embodiment and meta-movement [About Mapping the Futures of Higher Education].



                22
As the course progressed and explored these topics, we continued to develop the
                    Futures Initiative CBOX site in ways that took these lessons into account. In
                    doing so, we used what software developers call “agile
                        development” methodologies, striving for rapid and flexible
                    responses to the evolving course needs and user base. Over time, we implemented
                    additional customization, plugins, and styling in order to better serve the
                    largely undergraduate user population via use cases and support sessions. 

                23
The “Mapping” class sessions on life barriers and ethics
                    taught us about the demographics of the CUNY undergraduate student population.
                    Improving our installation of CBOX required interpreting this data about
                    undergraduate CUNY students to build an online community that would help improve
                    their digital literacy, while minimizing barriers of entry and access. As has
                    been noted extensively, the digital divide — or what Jan A.G.M. van Dijk
                    suggests is more aptly named “the digital spectrum” —
                    presents substantial issues for those who do not have access to the Internet
                        [van Dijk 2005, 4]. Literacy and access to books have
                    historically been vehicles for privileged classes to be informed, and today
                    those who do not have access to the web do not have the same opportunities as
                    those who enjoy Internet service in their homes. In the urban centers of the
                    United States, libraries in particular offer computers connected to the Internet
                    as a resource to the public, but this does not ultimately provide the same level
                    of access to the web as broadband at home, school, and work. 

                24
The “mobile turn” has served to fill some of this gap, as
                    recent studies have found that young students of color primarily access the
                    Internet through their mobile devices (see, e.g. [Anderson 2015]
                    [Lopez et al. 2013]
                    [Smith 2013]
                    [McGrane 2013]). Due to the increased adoption of smartphones as a
                    tool to access websites, it is increasingly important to have
                    mobile-friendliness or responsiveness at the center of web development [Mohorovičić 2013, 1206–1207]. Maura A. Smale and Mariana
                    Regalado, associate professors working with two CUNY campus libraries, have
                    found that many U.S. college students commute to campus and are therefore
                        “mobile by default”; CUNY students in particular use
                    their smartphones for academic activities including reading, research and even
                    writing papers while making their way to campus on public transportation [Regalado 2015, 2]
                    [Smale and Regalado 2014]. The importance of making our site mobile–responsive
                    is underscored by a 2013 study which found that among students in the CUNY
                    system, three quarters of respondents reported using mobile devices — including
                    to access library research resources — while commuting and while out with
                    friends [Becker et al. 2013]. CBOX was developed with a mobile and
                    dynamic student body in mind, and we have further encoded responsiveness via
                    plugins and CSS styling in order to be more available to students who are likely
                    accessing our site while they are commuting to class using the public bus system
                    or subways through New York City’s boroughs. Noting that the average length of a
                    CUNY student’s commute is between 30 and 60 minutes each way [CUNY Office of Policy Research], and learning about the limited availability of wifi
                    on certain campuses, further inspired us to use a responsive design with
                    elements that would still work in low-bandwidth environments. 

                25
Another important theme that emerged from the “Mapping” course
                    was the need to design lessons, activities, assignments, and assessment
                    techniques shaped by an understanding of undergraduate students’ diverse modes
                    of learning. We hoped that the blog and forum components of the site would allow
                    instructors to rethink assessment, and particularly how class participation is
                    measured. While some students are either not afforded the opportunity to
                    participate because they are enrolled in large lecture courses or they are
                    intimidated by classroom conversation dynamics, a supplementary online
                    conversation space can allow more students to participate and shape the content
                    of their courses (see, e.g. [May 2014]). In their 2015 study of
                        “Mapping,” Janey Oliphint Flanagan and Deborah Greenblatt
                    found that the digital tools used in the class, and the CBOX site in particular, “added to the sense of community by giving quieter
                            students a comfortable place to share their thoughts and continue
                            conversations outside of class time”
                         [Flanagan 2015, 4]. By the completion of the first semester, the majority of the sites and
                    many of the groups on the network were student-created personal sites, blogs, or
                    groups that were not required by their instructors. Approximately 90% of the
                    site users were undergraduate students, and they took the lead not only in
                    creating sites, but also in exploring the course sites of classes they were not
                    enrolled in.

                
                    
                    [image: ]

                Figure 5. 
Site designed by undergraduate students in “Introduction to
                            Narrative” at Queens College: https://futuresinitiative.org/education/
                    


                26
When developing the course- and network-wide final project, we focused only
                    loosely on the concept of mapping, to allow for graduate student instructors and
                    undergraduate students to interpret the project, adapt technologies to their
                    learning goals, and approach technologies that were accessible to their skill
                    and comfort levels. As information technologists Liang Jingjing and Zhan
                    Qinglong note, with user-centered technologies, it is important for users to be
                    able to access and use technologies to meet their goals so that they maintain
                    motivation throughout their learning experience [Jingjing and Qinglong 2010, 301–304]. That is, technologies should be meeting users’ needs rather
                    than users adapting for technology. Therefore, the Futures Initiative Research
                    Fellows provided examples and support for GIS tools and other technologies to
                    graduate student instructors and undergraduate students, while encouraging them
                    to experiment and utilize what they found to be most applicable to their
                    educational goals. Rather than — although more often, in addition to — producing
                    traditional final research papers, graduate and undergraduate students
                    affiliated with the “Mapping” course learned to use platforms
                    like Google Docs, YouTube, Google Maps, Maps Marker, Adobe Illustrator, CartoDB,
                    OpenStreetMap, TikiToki, and WordPress to present what they had learned
                    throughout the semester in courses ranging from “Chemistry
                        201” to “Greek and Latin Roots of English.”
                    These various digital tools that students learned to use for their
                        “Mapping” projects illustrate their wide range of digital
                    literacies and diverse modes of creative expression. 

                27
The WordPress platform allows users to modify their course and personal sites by
                    selecting themes, and we enabled plugins for more advanced users to customize
                    CSS, while still allowing modifications through simple button-clicking if that
                    is preferred. Flanagan and Greenblatt found that these efforts are heading in
                    the right direction: by analyzing student interviews and surveys they determined
                    that the site was primarily used for “communication, collaboration, and learning with
                            peers”
                         [Flanagan 2015, 12]. While all of the undergraduate courses were represented online, the
                    instructors who incentivized student participation (through, for example,
                    mandatory blog posts for participation credit) predictably had more user
                    interaction, suggesting that more can be done to structure engagement outside of
                    instructor-driven requirements. 

                28
bell hooks was a key pedagogical theorist for the graduate students in
                        “Mapping,” and her work influenced our design decisions
                    as well. As hooks argues, liberatory education that challenges an imperialist,
                    capitalist, white supremacist, hetero-patriarchy “or any ideology” requires
                    the creation of a community in which students feel supported and empowered “to open their minds, to engage in rigorous study and to
                            think critically”
                         [hooks 2003, xiii]. In an effort to foster community-building across the Futures Initiative
                    network, we included a customized automatic join feature in the WordPress
                    hooks.php file (a file for developers to add their own code, no relation to bell
                    hooks) to enroll all new users in a site-wide group that they could later opt
                    out of if desired. Currently, users are connected to the
                        “Welcome!” group, through which we circulate information
                    about workshops and events related to student-centered pedagogy and
                    institutional change, and invite site users to participate in our multi-year
                        “University Worth Fighting For” initiative. Automatically
                    enrolling users into these groups is a way for us to digitally wave
                        “hello” to users and to connect them immediately with the
                    greater network by giving each user a platform within the
                        “Welcome!” group forum to write and respond to others.
                    Flanagan and Greenblatt found that these initial efforts to build community were
                    successful, explaining, “The blog was an important aspect of the
                            undergraduates[’] experiences since it created a stronger sense of a
                            community at … CUNY campuses made up mostly of commuters”
                         [Flanagan 2015, 11]. 

                29
The look and feel of futuresinitiative.org and user-friendliness of the design
                    have been significant factors in ensuring that our site encourages interaction,
                    exploration, and community-building. Our site is the direct result of
                    user-producers who engage with it through content creation, illustrating, as
                    David Gallula and Ariel J. Frank have found, that Web 2.0’s emphasis on
                    user-generated content and usability can help facilitate “collaborative/peer/social learning”
                         [Gallula 2009, 229]. To foster this user-driven content, we have considered the overall
                    design of the site, and have opted for a bright aesthetic with clean and flat
                    lines that is intuitive to navigate. By incorporating blank negative space
                    throughout our site’s design, we provide a relaxed space for users while also
                    allowing them to creatively project onto the negative space, further encouraging
                    user participation (see, e.g. [Zong et al. 2008, 930]).

                30
As a digital humanities project built with the community that uses and continues
                    to expand on it, CBOX as a platform and tool offers a more user-driven approach
                    than other open-source and especially proprietary educational content management
                    systems that are built by developers and technologists rather than teachers and
                    students themselves. CBOX is a project that comes out of the CUNY community of
                    teachers and students that are using it, and also contributes code upstream to
                    the greater open-source WordPress community. Through our team’s ongoing
                    contributions to our customized version of CBOX and to the greater CBOX network,
                    we can reassess the ideals that are channeled into a broader network through a
                    commitment to code developed by the end users it serves. 

            

            
                Looking forward

                31
 In creating a digital humanities tool and organizing a project stemming from the
                    educational needs and desires of CUNY’s diverse student population, we used the
                    insights of humanistic inquiry to inform digital learning spaces at the
                    undergraduate level. The Futures Initiative CBOX tool and its associated mapping
                    project were the beginning of an investigation to find, transform, and develop
                    flexible environments for digital learning alongside innovative classroom
                    practices. As we continue to work together with students to imagine better
                    digital humanities tools, we hope to open this dialogue with other educators
                    interested in building classrooms that incorporate digital humanities
                    methodologies and techniques.

                32
There are quite a few items we would like to address in the years ahead to
                    further our mission of advancing equity and innovation in higher education.
                    Flanagan and Greenblatt’s research found that graduate student instructors
                    wanted “special workshops dedicated to mapping software and the
                            CBOX [site]”
                         [Flanagan 2015, 7]. While we have provided one-on-one support in person and via email, there
                    is the possibility to offer extended workshops with fellows and administrators
                    in our group, or else to liaise with other digital initiatives at the Graduate
                    Center to offer specialized instruction. This kind of support may help users to
                    be less dependent on one-on-one help later in the semester, which may make
                    workflows for Futures Initiative Fellows and administrators more consistent over
                    time. 

                33
The Futures Initiative quickly developed its own Terms of Use and Privacy Policy,
                    including a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial Share Alike 3.0 license
                    to encourage open-access and sharing of materials. However, there is more that
                    can be done to increase transparency, support, and access. Currently, the
                    Futures Initiative site points to the CUNY Academic Commons’ FAQs and
                    documentation, though it would be preferable to have our own site-specific FAQs,
                    and perhaps our own documentation as our site evolves over time. To this end,
                    the site’s current administrators and developers — FI Fellows Jessica Murray and
                    Michelle Morales — have put together a series of tutorials for building sites on
                    CBOX to encourage self-guided troubleshooting. We plan to use animated GIFs as
                    the primary visual method for explicating use cases (similar to GitHub’s
                    Guides), in order to make our FAQs accessible to users who are inexperienced
                    with the WordPress content management system. Additionally, we plan to make our
                    full source code available on GitHub once we have a more stable and more
                    realized Futures Initiative theme. 

                34
We also aim to improve the site’s accessibility. While the site currently uses
                    the WP Accessibility plugin, which allows users to modify the contrast,
                    grayscale, and text, we are running accessibility reports over the main parent
                    site to make the site more responsive to the needs of users with a wide range of
                    abilities. This will likely include multilingual support (especially in the
                    largely immigrant student community of CUNY), additional keyboard-based
                    controls, text-to-speech support, and a more careful use of alt tags when
                    embedding images. 

                35
While there are many alterations we would like to make in establishing a careful
                    balance between the site’s customizability and its ease-of-use, the emergence of
                    a new, recent network site testifies to the success of our first year. Over the
                    summer, thirty-five undergraduates from among the 365 students affiliated with
                        “Mapping” courses applied, were selected, and received a
                    stipend to serve as Futures Initiative Mentors. These were students who had used
                    CBOX in their Futures Initiative courses the previous semester and had
                    contributed to the CUNY Maps of New York. At the end of a two-day intensive
                    mentorship training session, the graduate instructors facilitating the workshop
                    reproduced a version of the pedagogical experiment implemented in
                        “Mapping.” After telling the undergraduate peer mentors
                    that they would have two hours to design final projects that would help them
                    mentor other CUNY students in the upcoming academic year, the graduate student
                    mentors and other workshop facilitators left the room, trusting the
                    undergraduate mentors’ abilities to collaborate in the production of effective
                    mentorship resources. Upon returning to the workshop, the facilitators found
                    that the undergraduate mentors had abandoned their preliminary plans of creating
                    several projects, and had instead opted to create a mentorship site on the
                    Futures Initiative CBOX platform, one that would serve as a hub to keep them
                    connected across geographic campus divides, which they would populate with
                    useful information for their peers. Several undergraduate mentors have since
                    taken a lead role in designing this site, creating a private page for mentors to
                    dialogue about the mentoring process, a page for mentees to ask questions, and
                    resource pages for each campus. The fact that undergraduate students from across
                    different campuses and majors, and with varying degrees of digital literacy,
                    felt empowered to design an online space using CBOX testifies to the success of
                    our initial efforts to create a dynamic, accessible online learning
                    community.

                36
 Today, the Futures Initiative CBOX site is currently in its fifth semester of
                    use by the greater CUNY community and hosts over 717 users across 18 CUNY
                    campuses. The site is a work–in–progress, but has been serving our needs very
                    well due to it being built upon the familiar platforms of BuddyPress and
                    WordPress. We believe that the site and its student-driven mapping project are
                    scalable to fit the needs of other institutions and courses both nationally and
                    internationally, and that connecting learners across disciplinary and
                    geographical boundaries can enrich educational environments in classrooms,
                    digital spaces, cities, and communities. 

            

            
                Building a University Worth Fighting For

                37
Given that online spaces are an increasingly important location of thinking and
                    learning, it is worth considering how to best develop and provide support for
                    digital learning communities. However, the work that goes into community
                    building is regularly undervalued and underestimated, which can quickly derail
                    well-intentioned efforts to foster learning networks. To address this, we
                    examine key issues related to pedagogical ethics, budgets, time, and
                    organizational labor when building an online community to foster undergraduate
                    learning:

                	Consider, regularly consult with, and request feedback from the
                        undergraduate student users. In addition to interpreting relevant data about
                        undergraduate student users, ask for their input and feedback in developing
                        future iterations. Consider having undergraduates help develop the site as a
                        paid internship. 
	Have ongoing dialogues with community members about how to balance the
                        benefits of public learning with the need to create caring learning
                        environments, in which undergraduate students can experiment with new ideas
                        without exposure to public scrutiny. 
	Treat the online learning community as an opportunity to promote both
                        digital literacy and meta-cognitive learning processes. Ask students how
                        they learn best, and in what ways the online component helps them
                        learn.
	When selecting an online platform to develop into a learning community,
                        assess the amount of labor and skills that each option will require. 	The CBOX installation described in this article was maintained and
                                developed by the full time Futures Initiative Deputy Director,
                                Katina Rogers, and supported by four part-time Graduate Fellows. In
                                their research, Flanagan and Greenblatt found that the speed with
                                which users received responses to their individual questions was
                                essential for its success. 
	Consider the information technology infrastructure and hosting
                                opportunities available to you within your institution, and whether
                                or not you will be granted server access.
	If you choose to use a site like CBOX, or a WordPress- or
                                Drupal-based site, it is fairly simple to install, but an IT server
                                administrator available to you would free up some of your or your
                                team’s personal resources.
	The above-mentioned content management systems are shipped with a
                                graphical user interface administrator backend, though if you
                                require more customization and control, a good knowledge of CSS, PHP
                                and server administration would help you work with the source code
                                and server side of the installation.
	In selecting a platform, consider the needs and skills of the user
                                base. Users who know HTML and CSS can make greater use of creating
                                web-based content in general, and educators may want to offer or
                                organize training sessions for undergraduate students.
	To maintain a safe and productive online learning space,
                                acknowledge that a certain level of community management will be
                                required, which could add to the labor of individuals and disrupt
                                workflows if serious issues occur.



	Consult the “Critical and Creative Precepts for
                            Digital Humanities Projects” included in “An
                            Invitation Towards Social Justice in the Digital Humanities,”
                        available via http://criticaldh.roopikarisam.com/



                38
 Ever since the late 19th century, when Charles Eliot and a handful of others
                    created the system of modern American research universities we have inherited
                    today, decisions about education have tended to flow from the wealthy, elite
                    schools attended by relatively few students, downwards and outwards to those who
                    teach working-class students, often with minimal resources [Davidson 2017]. Including these very students in the decisions
                    that are made about their education is crucial to their empowerment and sense of
                    agency far beyond the classroom. Drawing on insights from the digital humanities
                    and student-centered pedagogy, the Futures Initiative works to counter
                    institutional and structural inequality not through goodwill, but by building
                    structures for equality. Instead of making decisions “for”
                    undergraduates, we train graduate students across disciplines to work
                        “with” their students in creating their learning and
                    their learning environments, thus engaging the kind of critical, creative, and
                    collaborative participation necessary in the world beyond the classroom. We have
                    found that when undergraduate and graduate students alike are treated as active
                    and dynamic knowledge-producers, each of whom has something to contribute to the
                    scene of teaching and learning, hierarchical relationships of power and
                    knowledge are reconfigured. This, in turn, demands something other than
                    traditional classrooms, practices, modes of assessment, and online learning
                    spaces. Full participation, equitable collaboration, and student-centered
                    learning require and produce different structures and spaces. Through our work
                    on this open-source, community-created, and student-driven online learning
                    platform, we seek to include graduate and undergraduate students in the creation
                    of their learning. By creating environments for equitable participation and
                    successful collaboration among diverse and creative students, we are working to
                    promote social change and redistribute power, starting in the undergraduate
                    classroom. In a climate of educational austerity, we are working to build a
                    university worth fighting for. 

            

        
        
            
        
    

Notes
[1]  Undergraduate students at CUNY have
                        historically inspired educators to move beyond established pedagogical
                        paradigms. In the field of composition and rhetoric, the work of influential
                        scholars such as Mina Shaughnessy and Kenneth M. Bruffee was shaped by their
                        interactions with — and commitments to — students in the CUNY system [Shaughnessy 1977]
                        [Bruffee 1984]. Adrienne Rich’s essay “Teaching Language in Open Admissions” illustrates how deeply the
                        poet was influenced by her time teaching in the Search for Education,
                        Elevation, and Knowledge (SEEK) program at City College, alongside educators
                        such as Audre Lorde, Toni Cade Bambara, and June Jordan [Rich 1979]. More recently, Pam Mills and Donna McGregor have
                        begun to redefine how students study chemistry by flipping the lecture
                        classroom and teaching scientific literacy as a social justice issue [Mills and McGregor 2013]. The recent graduate–student run conferences on
                        Feminist Pedagogy and Purposeful Pedagogy at the Graduate Center have helped
                        ensure that justice and equity remain a vital part of CUNY’s intellectual
                        mission. 

Works Cited
About Mapping the Futures of Higher Education 
                    “About Mapping the Futures of Higher Education.”
                    The Futures Initiative (2015): http://futures.gc.cuny.edu/about-mapping-futures/.
Anderson 2015 Anderson, M. “Racial and ethnic differences in how people use mobile technology”
                    Pew Research Center (April 30, 2015): http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/04/30/racial-and-ethnic-differences-in-how-people-use-mobile-technology/. 
Bayliss 2012 Bayliss, J.D. “Teaching game AI through Minecraft mods” Proc. Games Innovation
                    Conference (IGIC), Rochester, NY (2012): 1-4. 
Becker et al. 2013 Becker, D. A., Bonadie-Joseph,
                    I., and Cain, J. “Developing and completing a library mobile
                        technology survey to create a user-centered mobile presence”
                    Library Hi Tech 31(4) (2013): 688-99. 
Berg 2015 Berg, S.L. “The
                        Pedagogy of Trolls.”
                    Hybrid Pedagogy (May 2016, 2015): http://www.hybridpedagogy.com/journal/the-pedagogy-of-trolls/. 
Bruffee 1984 Bruffee, K.M. “Collaborative learning and the ‘conversation on mankind.’”
                    College English 46, no. 7 (1984): 635-652.
CUNY Office of Policy Research CUNY Office of
                    Policy Research. “Research Briefs” and “Working Papers.”
                    http://www.cuny.edu/about/administration/offices/ira/opr.html. 
Clark 2005 Clark, M. R. “Negotiating the freshman year: Challenges and strategies among first-year
                        college students”
                    Journal of College Student Development, 46(3)
                    (2005): 296-316. 
Commons In A Box “Commons
                        In A Box: About the Project.” Commons In A Box (2016): http://commonsinabox.org/. 
Complete College America Complete College
                    America. “Time is the Enemy” (2011): http://www.completecollege.org/docs/Time_Is_the_Enemy.pdf. 
Davidson 2011 Davidson, C. Now You See It: How Technology and Brain Science Will Transform Schools and
                        Business for the 21st Century. New York: Penguin (2012).
Davidson 2017 Davidson, C. The New Education: How To Revolutionize the University to Prepare Students
                        for a World in Flux. (Basic Books/Hachette, September 2017)
Davidson and Goldberg 2010 Davidson, C. and
                    Goldberg, T.D. The Future of Thinking in a Digital
                        Age. Cambridge, MA, The MIT Press (2010).
Flanagan 2015 Flanagan, J. and Greenblatt, D.
                        “Summary Report: A Mixed-Methods Study on the Course
                        ‘Mapping the Futures of Higher Education’ at CUNY”: http://futures.gc.cuny.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/FINAL_REPORT_MFHE-2.pdf. 
Freire 1970 Freire, P. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Translated by Myra Bergman Ramos. New
                    York: Continuum (1970).
Gallula 2009 Gallula, D. and Ariel J. Frank, A.J.
                        “Enriching the E-learning Experience in the Framework of
                        Web 2.0 Using Usability 2.0” 2009 Fourth International
                    Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology, Cannes, La
                    Bocca (August 2009): 229-234. 
Grant 2013 Grant, S. and Shawgo, K.E. “Digital Badges: An Annotated Research Bibliography”
                    (2013): http://www.hastac.org/digital-badges-bibliography. 
Jingjing and Qinglong 2010 Jingjing, L. and
                    Qinglong, Z. “Design of Model for Activity-Centered Web
                        Learning and User Experience” 2010 International Conference on
                    Artificial Intelligence and Education (ICAIE), Hangzhou, China (October 2010):
                    301-304.
Lopez et al. 2013 Lopez, M.H, Gonzalez-Barrera, A.
                    and Patten, E. “Closing the Digital Divide: Latinos and
                        Technology Adoption” Pew Research Center: Hispanic Trends (March 7,
                    2013): http://www.pewhispanic.org/2013/03/07/closing-the-digital-divide-latinos-and-technology-adoption/. 
Lorde 1984 Lorde, A. “The
                        Master’s Tools Will Never Dismantle the Master’s House.”
                    Sister Outsider. Freedom, CA: The Crossing Press
                    (1984).
May 2014 May, K.T. “How to Teach
                        a Young Introvert” (September, 2, 2014): http://ideas.ted.com/how-to-teach-a-young-introvert/. 
McGrane 2013 McGrane, K. “The
                        Rise of the Mobile-Only User”
                    Harvard Business Review (May 28, 2013): https://hbr.org/2013/05/the-rise-of-the-mobile-only-us/. 
Mills and McGregor 2013  Mills, P. and McGregor, D.
                        “Developing visual resources for a fully online or
                        hybrid General Chemistry course” (2013) http://www.hunter.cuny.edu/ttlg/fitt/projects/2013/mills
                
Mohorovičić 2013 Mohorovičić, S. “Implementing Responsive Web Design for Enhanced Web
                        Presence”
                    Information & Communication Technology Electronics
                        & Microelectronics (MIPRO), Opatija (2013): 1206-1210.
Our History “Our
                        History” City College of New York (2015): http://www.ccny.cuny.edu/about/history.cfm. 
Posner 2015 Posner, M. “What’s
                        Next: The Radical, Unrealized Potential of Digital Humanities” (July
                    27, 2015): http://miriamposner.com/blog/whats-next-the-radical-unrealized-potential-of-digital-humanities/. 
Rancière 1991 Rancière, J. The Ignorant Schoolmaster: Five Lessons in Intellectual
                        Emancipation. Translated by Kristin Ross. Stanford University Press,
                    Stanford (1991). 
Regalado 2015 Regalado, M. and Smale, M.A.
                        “Serving the Commuter College Student in Urban Academic
                        Libraries”
                    Urban Library Journal, 21(1), (2015): http://ojs.gc.cuny.edu/index.php/urbanlibrary/article/view/1619. 
Rich 1979 Rich, A. “Teaching
                        Language in Open Admissions”
                    On Lies, Secrets, and Silence. New York: W.W.
                    Norton & Company, Inc. (1979).
Risam 2015 Risam, R. “Beyond
                        the Margins: Intersectionality and the Digital Humanities.”
                    Digital Humanities Quarterly 19.2 (2015): http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/2/000208/000208.html. 
Roscoe et al. 2014 Roscoe, J.F., Fearn, S., and
                    Posey, E. “Teaching Computational Thinking by Playing Games
                        and Building Robots”
                    Interactive Technologies and Games (iTAG),
                    Nottingham (2014): 9-12.
Saito et al. 2014 Saito, D., Takebayashi, A. and
                    Yamaura, T. “Minecraft-based preparatory training for
                        software development project”
                    International Professional Communication Conference
                        (IPCC), Pittsburgh, PA (2014): 1-9. 
Schifter and Cipollone 2013 Schifter, C. and
                    Cipollone, M.. “Minecraft as a teaching tool: One case
                        study” Proc. Soc. Inform. Technology & Teacher Education Int.
                    Conf., Chesapeake, VA (2013): 2951-2955. 
Shaughnessy 1977 Shaughnessy, M.P. Errors and Expectations: A Guide for the Teacher of Basic
                        Writing. New York: Oxford University Press (1977).
Short 2012 Short, D. “Teaching
                        scientific concepts using a virtual world-Minecraft”
                    Teaching Science: The Journal of the Australian Science
                        Teachers Association, vol. 58, no. 3 (2012): 55-58. 
Smale and Regalado 2014 Smale, M.A. and Regalado,
                    M. “Commuter students using technology.”
                    EDUCAUSE Review Online (September 15, 2014): http://www.educause.edu/ero/article/commuter-students-using-technology. 
Smith 2013 Smith, A. “Smartphone Ownership 2013”
                    Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech
                    (June 5, 2013): http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/06/05/smartphone-ownership-2013/. 
Syllabus  Mapping the Futures of Higher Education
                    Syllabus (2015): http://futures.gc.cuny.edu/syllabus/.
Tagliaferri 2017 Tagliaferri, L. “Open-Access Student-Centered Learning: The open web as a
                        collaborative space for higher education in public.”
                    Advances in Intelligent Computing, Vol. 545:
                    Interactive Collaborative Learning, Springer Series (2017): 605-219. 
Watters 2017 Watters, A. “Ed-Tech in a Time of Trump” (2017) http://hackeducation.com/2017/02/02/ed-tech-and-trump
                
Zimmer 2008 Zimmer, M. “Preface: Special issue on critical perspectives on Web 2.0”
                    First Monday, vol. 13, no. 3 (March 3, 2008): http://firstmonday.org/article/view/2137/1943
                
Zong et al. 2008 Zong, S., Wang Y. and Zong, S.
                        “White Space Design and Its Application for Website
                        Interface” 9th International Conference on Computer-Aided Industrial
                    Design and Conceptual Design, Kunming, China (November 2008): 928-932.
hooks 2003 hooks, b. Teaching Community: A Pedagogy of Hope. Routledge, New
                    York (2003).
van Dijk 2005 van Dijk,
                    J.A.G.M. The Deepening Divide: Inequality in the
                        Information Society. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA (2005). 

2017 11.3
             | 
            XML
            | 
            Print Article


Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

 
            URL: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000306/000306.html
Last updated:
            
 Comments: dhqinfo@digitalhumanities.org
 Published by:
            The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
Affiliated with: Literary and Linguistic Computing
 Copyright 2005 - 
[image: Creative Commons License]
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
        


