Internet Wiretap Edition of

POLITICAL ECONOMY by MARK TWAIN

From "Sketches New and Old", Copyright 1903, Samuel Clemens.
This text is placed in the Public Domain (Jun 1993, #17).

(Written about 1870.)

POLITICAL ECONOMY

   POLITICAL Economy is the basis of all good
   government. The wisest men of all ages
   have brought to bear upon this subject the --

[Here I was interrupted and informed that a
stranger wished to see me down at the door. I
went and confronted him, and asked to know his
business, struggling all the time to keep a tight rein
on my seething political economy ideas, and not let
them break away from me or get tangled in their
harness. And privately I wished the stranger was
in the bottom of the canal with a cargo of wheat on
top of him. I was all in a fever, but he was cool.
He said he was sorry to disturb me, but as he was
passing he noticed that I needed some lightning-
rods. I said, "Yes, yes -- go on -- what about
it?" He said there was nothing about it, in par-
ticular -- nothing except that he would like to put
them up for me. I am new to housekeeping; have
been used to hotels and boarding-houses all my life.
Like anybody else of similar experience, I try to ap-
pear (to strangers) to be an old housekeeper; con-
sequently I said in an off-hand way that I had been
intending for some time to have six or eight light-
ning-rods put up, but --  The stranger started, and
looked inquiringly at me, but I was serene. I thought
that if I chanced to make any mistakes, he would not
catch me by my countenance. He said he would
rather have my custom than any man's in town. I
said, "All right," and started off to wrestle with
my great subject again, when he called me back and
said it would be necessary to know exactly how
many "points" I wanted put up, what parts of the
house I wanted them on, and what quality of rod I
preferred. It was close quarters for a man not used
to the exigencies of housekeeping; but I went
through creditably, and he probably never suspected
that I was a novice. I told him to put up eight
"points," and put them all on the roof, and use
the best quality of rod. He said he could furnish
the "plain" article at 20 cents a foot; "cop-
pered," 25 cents; "zinc-plated spiral-twist," at 30
cents, that would stop a streak of lightning any time,
no matter where it was bound, and "render its er-
rand harmless and its further progress apocryphal."
I said apocryphal was no slouch of a word, emanat-
ing from the source it did, but, philology aside, I
liked the spiral-twist and would take that brand.
Then he said he COULD make two hundred and fifty
feet answer; but to do it right, and make the best
job in town of it, and attract the admiration of the
just and the unjust alike, and compel all parties to
say they never saw a more symmetrical and hypo-
thetical display of lightning-rods since they were
born, he supposed he really couldn't get along with-
out four hundred, though he was not vindictive, and
trusted he was willing to try. I said, go ahead and
use four hundred, and make any kind of a job he
pleased out of it, but let me get back to my work.
So I got rid of him at last; and now, after half an
hour spent in getting my train of political economy
thoughts coupled together again, I am ready to go
on once more.]

   richest treasures of their genius, their
   experience of life, and their learning. The
   great lights of commercial jurisprudence,
   international confraternity, and biological
   deviation, of all ages, all civilizations,
   and all nationalities, from Zoroaster down to
   Horace Greeley, have --

[Here I was interrupted again, and required to go
down and confer further with that lightning-rod
man. I hurried off, boiling and surging with pro-
digious thoughts wombed in words of such majesty
that each one of them was in itself a straggling pro-
cession of syllables that might be fifteen minutes
passing a given point, and once more I confronted
him -- he so calm and sweet, I so hot and frenzied.
He was standing in the contemplative attitude of the
Colossus of Rhodes, with one foot on my infant
tuberose, and the other among my pansies, his hands
on his hips, his hat-brim tilted forward, one eye
shut and the other gazing critically and admiringly
in the direction of my principal chimney. He said
now THERE was a state of things to make a man glad
to be alive; and added, "I leave it to YOU if you
ever saw anything more deliriously picturesque than
eight lightning-rods on one chimney?" I said I had
no present recollection of anything that transcended
it. He said that in his opinion nothing on earth but
Niagara Falls was superior to it in the way of natural
scenery. All that was needed now, he verily be-
lieved, to make my house a perfect balm to the eye,
was to kind of touch up the other chimneys a little,
and thus "add to the generous coup d'oeil a sooth-
ing uniformity of achievement which would allay the
excitement naturally consequent upon the first coup
d'etat." I asked him if he learned to talk out of a
book, and if I could borrow it anywhere? He
smiled pleasantly, and said that his manner of
speaking was not taught in books, and that nothing
but familiarity with lightning could enable a man to
handle his conversational style with impunity. He
then figured up an estimate, and said that about
eight more rods scattered about my roof would
about fix me right, and he guessed five hundred feet
of stuff would do it; and added that the first eight
had got a little the start of him, so to speak, and
used up a mere trifle of material more than he had
calculated on -- a hundred feet or along there. I
said I was in a dreadful hurry, and I wished we
could get this business permanently mapped out, so
that I could go on with my work. He said, "I
could have put up those eight rods, and marched off
about my business -- some men WOULD have done it.
But no; I said to myself, this man is a stranger to
me, and I will die before I'll wrong him; there ain't
lightning-rods enough on that house, and for one
I'll never stir out of my tracks till I've done as I
would be done by, and told him so. Stranger, my
duty is accomplished; if the recalcitrant and dephlo-
gistic messenger of heaven strikes your --" "There,
now, there," I said, "put on the other eight -- add
five hundred feet of spiral-twist -- do anything and
everything you want to do; but calm your suffer-
ings, and try to keep your feelings where you can
reach them with the dictionary. Meanwhile, if we
understand each other now, I will go to work
again."

I think I have been sitting here a full hour this
time, trying to get back to where I was when my
train of thought was broken up by the last interrup-
tion; but I believe I have accomplished it at last,
and may venture to proceed again.]

   wrestled with this great subject, and the
   greatest among them have found it a worthy
   adversary, and one that always comes up 
   fresh and smiling after every throw. The
   great Confucius said that he would rather
   be a profound political economist than chief
   of police. Cicero frequently said that
   political economy was the grandest consummation
   that the human mind was capable of consuming;
   and even our own Greeley has said vaguely but
   forcibly that "Political --

[Here the lightning-rod man sent up another call
for me. I went down in a state of mind bordering
on impatience. He said he would rather have died
than interrupt me, but when he was employed to do
a job, and that job was expected to be done in a
clean, workmanlike manner, and when it was finished
and fatigue urged him to seek the rest and recreation
he stood so much in need of, and he was about to
do it, but looked up and saw at a glance that all the
calculations had been a little out, and if a thunder
storm were to come up, and that house, which he
felt a personal interest in, stood there with nothing
on earth to protect it but sixteen lightning-rods --
"Let us have peace!" I shrieked. "Put up a
hundred and fifty! Put some on the kitchen! Put
a dozen on the barn! Put a couple on the cow! --
Put one on the cook! -- scatter them all over the
persecuted place till it looks like a zinc-plated,
spiral-twisted, silver-mounted cane-brake! Move!
Use up all the material you can get your hands on,
and when you run out of lightning-rods put up ram-
rods, cam-rods, stair-rods, piston-rods -- ANYTHING
that will pander to your dismal appetite for artificial
scenery, and bring respite to my raging brain and
healing to my lacerated soul!" Wholly unmoved --
further than to smile sweetly -- this iron being
simply turned back his wristbands daintily, and said
he would now proceed to hump himself. Well,
all that was nearly three hours ago. It is question-
able whether I am calm enough yet to write on the
noble theme of political economy, but I cannot resist
the desire to try, for it is the one subject that is
nearest to my heart and dearest to my brain of all
this world's philosophy.]

   "-- economy is heaven's best boon to man."
   When the loose but gifted Byron lay in his
   Venetian exile he observed that, if it could
   be granted him to go back and live his
   misspent life over again, he would give his
   lucid and unintoxicated intervals to the
   composition, not of frivolous rhymes, but of
   essays upon political economy. Washington
   loved this exquisite science; such names as
   Baker, Beckwith, Judson, Smith, are
   imperishably linked with it; and even imperial
   Homer, in the ninth book of the Iliad,
   has said: --

       Fiat justitia, ruat coelum,
       Post mortem unum, ante bellum,
       Hic jacet hoc, ex-parte res,
       Politicum e-conomico est.

   The grandeur of these conceptions of the old
   poet, together with the felicity of the wording
   which clothes them, and the sublimity of the
   imagery whereby they are illustrated, have
   singled out that stanza, and made it more
   celebrated than any that ever --

["Now, not a word out of you -- not a single
word. Just state your bill and relapse into impene-
trable silence for ever and ever on these premises.
Nine hundred dollars? Is that all? This check for
the amount will be honored at any respectable bank
in America. What is that multitude of people
gathered in the street for? How? -- 'looking at
the lightning-rods!' Bless my life, did they never
see any lightning-rods before? Never saw 'such a
stack of them on one establishment,' did I under-
stand you to say? I will step down and critically
observe this popular ebullition of ignorance."]

THREE DAYS LATER. -- We are all about worn
out. For four-and-twenty hours our bristling prem-
ises were the talk and wonder of the town. The
theaters languished, for their happiest scenic inven-
tions were tame and commonplace compared with
my lightning-rods. Our street was blocked night
and day with spectators, and among them were
many who came from the country to see. It was a
blessed relief on the second day when a thunder
storm came up and the lightning began to "go for"
my house, as the historian Josephus quaintly phrases
it. It cleared the galleries, so to speak. In five
minutes there was not a spectator within half a mile
of my place; but all the high houses about that dis-
tance away were full, windows, roof, and all. And
well they might be, for all the falling stars and Fourth
of July fireworks of a generation, put together and
rained down simultaneously out of heaven in one
brilliant shower upon one helpless roof, would not
have any advantage of the pyrotechnic display that
was making my house so magnificently conspicuous
in the general gloom of the storm. By actual count,
the lightning struck at my establishment seven hun-
dred and sixty-four times in forty minutes, but
tripped on one of those faithful rods every time,
and slid down the spiral-twist and shot into the
earth before it probably had time to be surprised at
the way the thing was done. And through all that
bombardment only one patch of slates was ripped
up, and that was because, for a single instant, the
rods in the vicinity were transporting all the light-
ning they could possibly accommodate. Well, noth-
ing was ever seen like it since the world began. For
one whole day and night not a member of my family
stuck his head out of the window but he got the hair
snatched off it as smooth as a billiard-ball; and, if
the reader will believe me, not one of us ever
dreamt of stirring abroad. But at last the awful
siege came to an end -- because there was absolutely
no more electricity left in the clouds above us within
grappling distance of my insatiable rods. Then I
sallied forth, and gathered daring workmen together,
and not a bite or a nap did we take till the premises
were utterly stripped of all their terrific armament
except just three rods on the house, one on the
kitchen, and one on the barn -- and, behold, these
remain there even unto this day. And then, and
not till then, the people ventured to use our street
again. I will remark here, in passing, that during
that fearful time I did not continue my essay upon
political economy. I am not even yet settled enough
in nerve and brain to resume it.

TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN. -- Parties having
need of three thousand two hundred and eleven feet
of best quality zinc-plated spiral-twist lightning-rod
stuff, and sixteen hundred and thirty-one silver-
tipped points, all in tolerable repair (and, although
much worn by use, still equal to any ordinary emer-
gency), can hear of a bargain by addressing the
publisher.

END.
.
